---
layout: post
title: Dynamics of Competitive Advantage From First Principles
published: true
---


## Introduction 

I’ve recently started reading the book _7 Powers: The Foundations of Business Strategy_ on the recommendation of Keith Rabois, a partner at Khosla Ventures. The book, which one can consider a expanded, more fundamental version of Porter’s Competitive Strategy classic, is a good overview of corporate strategy. I would recommend anyone who has some free time to give it a read. However, I wanted to discuss an aspect of the book that consistently nagged me while reading it. The author, a former BCG consultant and economist, divides the book into two sections, the former describing competitive _statics_ — what set of characteristics and situations define durable competitive advantage at a particular point in time — and the other describing competitive _dynamics_  — how competitive advantage is both gained and lost over time (focusing on the gaining). This distinction is crucial because while I read Part I of the novel in general agreement and interest, Part II left me wanting. And the lack of a solid theoretical grounding for governing the dynamics of capitalism is not just something I found lacking with this book. Rather, most of what I’ve read about the topic has left me dissatisfied. 

Given that the process of industrial change — the birth and death of industries, the emerging of new corporate titans and the reinvention of old ones — is so fundamentally critical to economic growth and the mythos capitalism more broadly, it strikes me as odd that we do not yet have (or I don't yet know about) a defining paradigm for governing how to think about its causes. That is, we don’t yet have a 'go-to' framework for analyzing dynamics, one that holds a similar position to Porter’s 5 Forces. 

So I thought I would attempt to derive a theory of competitive dynamics on my own from first principles, one that can explain more example of industry change than I believe existing theories can. As an aspiring venture investor,  I’m primarily interested in  the impact of _technological change_ on the dynamics of competitive advantage. That is, how and when does technology enable new company formation and success? When do incumbents win? When do new companies? Technological change is not the only facet of industrial mutation of course. Rather, because it is of practical importance to venture capitalists — even baby ones like myself — and to other stakeholders who are betting millions of dollars on technology-driven change, it tends to be discussed more prominently in the literature. 

## Business Models as a Starting Point

Before one can think about change, one must have a theory of business to use as a starting  point. I begin with a description of an incumbent firms’ **business model**. The term business model, like many qualitative terms used in business, carries with it multiple interpretations and definitions. Mine is pretty much stolen from this 2002 Harvard Business Review article, [“Why Business Models Matter”](https://hbr.org/2002/05/why-business-models-matter). To quote Joan Magretta, business models are:

> “stories — stories that explain how enterprises work. A good business model answers Peter Drucker’s age-old questions, ‘Who is the customer? And what does the customer value?’ It also answers the fundamental questions every manager must ask: How do we make money in this business? What is the underlying economic logic that explains how we can deliver value to customers at an appropriate cost?” 
> 




To me, this means the following. I give you one piece of paper, and using it, explain, in detail, the entire business to me (where business is defined around one single product/service or small numbers of related ones, not an entire firm). 

That is a daunting task, and one that encompasses a larger number of factors, both internal to and external of the firm. Here’s my picture of what should go on that one page - the totality of elements that define a business. 

1. The single necessary and sufficient characteristic of a business is a **paying customer**, who is presumably paying for a product or service that the business offers. That means the firm has to have a product or service — something it produces and sells in a market that hopefully provides value to someone. That product (I will stop using the ‘or service’ addition here,  but most of what I say is applicable to services as well as products) is inextricable from the set of **customer segments who value that product to some degree, because it fulfills a need or want**. That value embodied in the product to a certain set of customers has lot of names, Core Product Value, Value Proposition, etc., and has a distinct magnitude associated with it that generally corresponds to the customers **willingness to pay** for the product. 
2. Part of that magnitude of value generated by the product for the customer has to be captured in some form by the company (otherwise, it has no hope of generating a profit). The method in which the firm captures value from its customers defines the firm’s **revenue model**. Examples include generating revenue from licensing (famously used by Qualcomm), through subcription models (used by Amazon Prime), or by generating revenue on fixed and variable components of the product separately (e.g. Gilette generated revenue on both razors as well as razor blades)
3. A firm also has to get the product in the hands of the customer who values it using **distribution channels**, which could take the form of selling the product to a retailer for a markdown, or could be selling directly to the customer via a platform like Amazon Marketplace. 
4. The firm has to have a certain set of internal resources to produce and sell the product. 
5. Other external agents in the environment. A firm also has to negotiate with **suppliers**, who provide the unfinished components necessary to operate the business and construct the product, as well as  **complementors**, who provide related products/services that increase the value generation of your product and provide an opportunity for cooperation. They also must bear the brunt of **substitutes**, products that attempt to fill the _same need or want_ that the business' product does. 
6. Lastly, in most situations, a business will not be the only entity that decides to market a product or service. Rather, they must deal with **competitors**, who each produce similar products. Competitors, both potential ones (**new entrants**) as well as existing ones, must be treated with a high level of respect because the ability of a firm to generate competitive advantage is highly dependent on the nature of competition. 

The key is to view all of these elements as generic classes that must be filled in with specific objects by the operators of the company. 

Now we've left out a key important fact. While all the 6 pieces above define a business in its entirety, it tells you nothing about whether the particular business is a **good** one. That's where strategy and durable competitive advantage comes in. These terms fit pretty well into this model of business. 

**Strategy** can be defined as a set of choices and actions that a company takes to achieve durable competitive advantage. In my model, strategy refers to the choices of specific elements to place into the generic 'slots' defined by the business model. That is, strategy involves choosing a customer, choosing a revenue model, choosing a product, choosing suppliers, etc., in such a fashion that maximizes the potential to achieve durable competitive advantage. 


**Durable competitive advantage** tells one whether a business is good or not. It can be defined in two parts:

-**Magnitude of returns** in excess of the cost of capital that a company does, or will, generate. Companies having durable competitive advantage should see materially higher cash flows than competitors by being able to charge more (also known as **pricing power**), operate with reduced fixed or variable costs (improved margin structure, lessened investment needs, etc.), and/or capture more long-term market share. 
-**Persistence** - the length of time a company can earn these excess returns. A company with durable competitive advnatage should prevent existing and potential competitors from entering the market, offering a similar product, and thus reducing the magnitude of excess of returns over time. 

Basically, every dominant business in the history of capitalism benefited from durable competitive advantage. That's what made Ford and Standard Oil so dominant, and currently makes Amazon, Facebook, and Google so dominant. 

_7 Powers_ defines seven situations that allow companies can earn durable competitive advantage, of which 6 are commonly known:

1. Supply Side Economies of Scale (Scale in Manufacturing, Distribution, Scope Economies, Learning Economies, etc.)
2. Networking Effects (Direct and Indirect)
3. Switching Costs
4. Branding 
5. Cornered Resources (e.g. Intellectual Property Protection)
6. Process Advantages

In each of these situations, a firm is able to earn excess returns in such a way that is immune to competition, both directly as compared to direct competitors, as well as indirectly against new entrants, substitutes, suppliers, and complementors. The firms in these positions earn excess returns for a consistent amount of time. Investors look at the companies' annual reports and throw praise on them. Stock prices rise over time. Customers come back. The good times roll. 

But here's the problem. As evidence by the fact that the most valuable companies in the world have changed so drastically from 1950 to now (Companies like General Motors, Exxon Mobil, Ford Motor, General Electric, U.S. Steel - the top five in 1950 - have been replaced by Apple, Alphabet, Microsoft, Faceboo, ad Amazon), even having a durable competitive advantage does not guarantee permanent immunity from business irrelevancy. Once dominant companies like IBM have gone through toughs. New dominant technology titans have emerged. Even the situations described above aren't permanent. So what accounts for this change? This is where a study of dynamics becomes important - only dynamics attempts to understand and explain how new industries are created, when new companies are at an advantage and when they are not. Knowing where to skate to - the 6 positions described above - is important, but knowing how to get there, and how those positions are lost - is another thing entirely. 


## From Statics to Dynamics

What I’ve just done is paint a static picture of a particular business. The critical thing to note about the picture is that every single element of the picture, whether external or internal to the firm, rests on a set of assumptions. The firm assumes that the product provides a certain amount of value by solving a certain problem — in reality the product may or may not. The firm assumes that the customers’ needs and wants (the ‘job to be done’) match what the product offers — this may or may not be true in reality.

### The Existing Literature: Disruption

Despite the relative dearth of academic attention given to the topic of competitive dynamics, there's one, glaring, huge exception to that statemet - disruption theory. The
