
I've wanted to write about Oscar Health, the NYC-based health insurer, for a long time now. I've been following their progress for several years now and, like many others, am fascinated by the ambition of their vision. I was curious to see whether they could buck the trend of health innovation failure and become a durable, long-lasting company. 

And recently, there's been a ton of news swirling around the company, which makes now as good a time as ever to get my thoughts out there. 

But first, some background.

## The Bear Scenario: Is Oscar Doomed to be Eternally Subscale?

Oscar is the poster-child of the new era of technology-enabled startups attempting to enter the healthcare industry. What started as the dream of current-CEO Mario Schlosser and his founding team has matured over the last 5 years into a full-blown health insurance company, covering close to 250,000 lives and projected to make $1.25 billion in revenue in 2018. It has tried to  capture the imagination of the public and members by promising everything that current inusurers don't: **simplicity and consumer delight.**

But even with those numbers and financial backing from some of Silicon Valley's smartest money (Google Ventures, General Catalyst, Khosla Ventures, and Founders Fund to name a few early investors), Oscar has been met with skepticisim from most of the traditional healthcare community for its entire existence. And itt wasn't just journalists with doubts either, but really, really smart investors and former operators as well.

And they have some concerns that shouldn't be laughed off by those interested in the future of the company. So before I spell out why I'm ultimately **bullish** on Oscar's chances, let's take a look at what was worrying them. 

If you're interested in Oscar and its fortunes, I recommend a series of posts by Dave Anderson, a current research associate at the Duke University Margolis Center and former operator at the UPMC Health Plan. He has  penned a some articles [here](https://www.balloon-juice.com/2016/06/20/oscar-and-what-do-they-do-differently/), [here](https://www.balloon-juice.com/2017/03/21/still-not-understanding-oscars-business-model/), [here](https://www.balloon-juice.com/2017/05/17/oscars-strategy-change-goes-meh/), and [here](https://www.balloon-juice.com/2018/03/05/the-other-oscar-thread/), which pretty comprehensively, and in a manner backed up by data, summarizes the bear view on Oscar: **because it's unclear what Oscar does differently than other insurers, and its unit economics don't paint the picture of profitability, it's difficult to imagine a future in which Oscar becomes a dominant player in the health insurance marketplace **.

Skeptics like Mr. Anderson (and others), make good points:

1. VCs care about two things above else: **growth** and **margins**. As a VC, I want to invest in companies that can grow quickly (they need to exit within 10 years), capture a large share of the market they're working in (which is hopefully large), and hopefully exert a competitive advantage that creates good margins relative to competitors.  Health insurance on the other hand a low margin business. By law, 80% of every dollar of revenue must be spent paying for members care, which caps the gross margin at 20%. And market share shifts in the health insurance business are glacial at best.  Contrast this to framous venture investments like Salesforce and Google, which both have gross-margins closer to 60-80%, and grew with lightning speed to capture significant share of their respective markets.
2. Health insurance is generally not a pleasant industry for new entrants - especially when the new founding team has no industry background. As one example, consider that just getting a product to the market in the health insurance industry requires building a network of physicians that meet network adequacy laws, which itself can be a pain. To do this, Oscar to actually sit down with providers and hammer out contracts which determined the prices Oscar was going to pay for different services. Knowing what those contracts look like, what good benchmarks are, and actually getting physicians to partner with you, are all hard to do without any experience. This is likely why Oscar (very expensively) rented an insurance network at its inception - something that played a role in their lack of profitability. These same concerns apply to the back-office intricacies of claims-processing, pricing their population, and gauging risk adjustment outflows, three of the key capabilities that Oscar was going to have to build from scratch or (again, expensively) rent.
3. You don't get consumer leeway in this business. Mistakes - like rejecting claims incorrectly - can permanently stain the reputation of a new company and make it hard to acquire customers. Incumbents can get away with this a lot, but they are incumbents for a reason. 
4. The competitive dynamics of the industry don't look attractive. Health insurance is an extremely concentrated industry where **scale** has been the primary route to competitive advantage. It's dominated by 4-5 major players who have either been around since the begining of the health insurance industry in the 1930s, or latched on to the growth of HMO plans in the late 1980s to get to scale before diversifying. UnitedHealthGroup, Anthem, Aetna, Humana, and Cigna all generate over $30 Billion in revenue, have market capitalizations exceeding $20 Billion, and thus are formidable competitors (e.g. see my piece on UHG's strategic prowess [here](https://windfreedom.github.io./healthcare's-blurring-lines/)). Without the number of members that the incumbents could bring to bear, it's understandable that skeptics are struggling to see how Oscar could construct a network in which they wouldn't be a price taker to increasingly concentrated provider systems - suffering large losses as a result. 
5. The market they were entering looked like a disaster for new companies. Contrasted with the much more tame and profitable Medicare Advantage market segment (ARPU is around 2x the average individual ARPU depeding on risk adjustment, churn is lower), in which  many new startups (e.g. Devoted Health, Clover Health) have launched, Oscar launched on the Obamacare individual exchanges. And for the first few years at least, these exchanges were bloodbaths for insurers. [United](http://www.modernhealthcare.com/article/20170418/NEWS/170419876), [Humana](https://www.cnbc.com/2017/02/14/humana-says-it-plans-to-pull-out-of-obamacare-exchanges-in-2018.html), Aetna and the other large insurers pulled out citing huge losses of up to $1 Billion over two years (although [the Florida Blues](http://www.modernhealthcare.com/article/20160615/NEWS/160619946) in particular have noted a 17% gross margin - which for the ACA exchanges is very impressive indeed). The economics of these exchanges seemed at odds with Oscar's product's strategy. Consumers are **price sensistive**, **churn is high** (commercial markets generally keep customers for ~1 year, no more), and **risk-adjustment** means that an insurer can be penalized for having too healthy a class of individuals. Those three variables don't look great when you plug them into a LTV model.
6. Finally, the best critics are looking at numbers to justify their criticism. Oscar has lost **a lot** of money. 

To put it simply, Oscar looked like a bad bet for those who prioritize fast growth, high margins, and market dominance above all else. 

And yet, little-by little Oscar started to do the small things that are important to run a successful health insurance businesss correctly. A quick gander about their blog demonstrates how well they've come to understand the business they're in. 

- [Here](https://www.hioscar.com/blog/this-is-not-a-bill-oscars-journey-to-create-a-better-eob) they describe their approach to creating a better Explanation of Benefits statement (which is the letter you get from your insurance company after you use services; it's usually unreadably complicated).
- [Here](https://www.hioscar.com/blog/better-claims-processing-better-health-care-experience) they explain how claims processing systems work.
- [Here](https://www.hioscar.com/blog/gabe-switches-doctors-a-health-care-story) they explain how difficult it was for one of their own executives to switch doctors, illustrating some of the problems patients face when trying to navigate the health care system.
- [Here](https://www.hioscar.com/blog/connecting-the-dots-with-the-clinical-dashboard) they describe their clinical dashboard that both providers and members can access. 
- They've made [using telemedicine](https://www.linkedin.com/pulse/virtual-care-future-smart-fast-interconnected-alan-warren/) a much bigger priority than most insurers 
-  Many insurers can't even properly maintain provider lists because the data about providers they use is so unreliable. So Oscar tried to design a better provider directory [here](https://medium.com/oscar-tech/building-a-doctor-directory-f241abfffae6)
- And topping it all off, they describe their approach to network building [here](https://www.hioscar.com/blog/a-new-kind-of-health-insurance-network).

I recently got to visit the Oscar HQ in SoHo, and it's obvious that they've put together a stunning team. Everyone I met with was humble and honest about what they did know, and what they didn't; what capabilities they were bootstrapping, building and which ones remained outside the company's hands. The mix of individuals from traditional healthcare backgrounds( e.g. former operational leaders from HCA) former policy researchers and analysts, economists, actual doctors, (even a physicist turned data scientist!) all combined with amazing technical talent, was amazing to see first-hand. The mix is perfectly keeping with what one might expect from an insurer that also happens to be a software company. And everyone at the company that I met with spoke about how much they still wanted to learn about their industry. If I had to evaluate the company from the standpoint of personnel alone, I'd immediately invest. 

The problem is, as strategy legend Michael Porter loves to point out - **[operational excellence is not strategy](https://pdfs.semanticscholar.org/62a5/6cb47ec0a181da67358662446ab7d544c01f.pdf)**. Rather, irrespective of the industry chosen or product/service marketed, for a firm to  achieve sustained returns above the cost of capital and above those of the competition (and thus capture enough of the value it creates for customers), it must engage in activities that  materially increase cash flow. It can do this by increasing the price the company can charge without bleeding volume, by reducing the costs necessary to serve the business without compromising product quality, or by being able to take market share without expending excess capital that would depress returns. Put simply, it has to engage in activities that are both value added and hard to imitate.

To achieve this source of durable excess cash return, new entrants generally have to change the competitive dynamics of an industry in some dramatic fashion (or create a new value chain from scratch) - incumbents have their own sources of competitive advantage that prevents a new entrant from just blatantly copying their success. Malay Gandhi, who a while ago [wrote](https://medium.com/@malay/building-a-big-health-tech-company-76f51ab4da64) the defining piece on building a venture scale healthcare company, put it pretty succintly on a recent podcast. It's very easy to see that a company using software tools can run a more efficient version of an existing insurer or provider. But the key to any new entrant in healthcare's success will be its ability to grow and gain market share. They have to have a scalable distribution advantage. 

So is Oscar a company that's going to truly revolutionize the healthcare industry by changing the rules of competition in the health insurance industry, thereby creating a durable moat for itself? Or is it just another small insurer doomed to be eternally subscale and thus at the mercy of industry economics? 

The report provides some hints as to the answer. Specifically it paints a 'best case' scenario - what Oscar might achieve should its vision come to fruition. And although one has to read between the lines of the report (it is a marketing report after all) a bit to get at that truth, if you do,it's pretty clear what investors saw.

Briefly, Oscar's strategy can be decomposed into 5 parts:

1. Get members to engage with the health insurer regarding their health problesm.
2. Build a virtual care platform that interacts with patients as well as all the interal teams of the company. This platform should include care routing teams, PCPs, messaging, ability to view health records, etc. Several of these tools have been built, several haven't yet.
3. Use the virtual care platform to become a **switch** for routing patients into high-value care episodes. This also involves understanding what physician networks are high value and which are not - especially taking into account referral patterns.
4. Construct tools that allow for a scalable way of ranking and designing physician networks in any geography.
5. Automate many of the back-office tasks of the insurer (what I think is the least important part of the strategy). 

Oscar's report goes into way more detail about these tools and gives data to support their usage rates. But what's lacking from the report directly is an understanding of why those tools are valuable from a competitive dynamics perspective. That's what I'll discuss now. 

## Can Oscar Execute a Dominant Strategy?

Specifically, I think that the tools described in Parts 1-4 of that strategy will allows Oscar to engage in a type of competition that former Intel-CEO Andy Grove called 'rule-breaking behavior'. Most of the time, in steady state competitive environments, share shifts between companies are marginal and each competitor attends to a strategy that is defined by the competitive rules of the industry. This is what we traditionally think of when we say that 'strategy is about tradeoffs '. Ben Thompson [states](https://stratechery.com/2013/amazons-dominant-strategy/): "Usually, strategy is about tradeoffs. Do you want to have high quality, or low prices? Do you want to iterate quickly, or create the big launch? Do you want to segment the market and deliver multiple offerings, or focus on one product and gain returns to scale?" What investors saw in Oscar was the ability to break the competitive rules of the game.

In insurance there's a tradeoff between two competitive metrics: **annual member premiums charged** (as well as other costs like deductibles, copays, etc.) and the **network's breadth** (the number of provider groups in the network). Cheaper plans tend to be very restrictive, narrow-network plans (e.g. HMOs, EPOs) while more expensive plans tend to be much broader. This reflects the existing competitive reality of the industry - if you can reasonably threaten to exclude a provider from a network that drives a lot of their volume (remember, scale is the key path to competitive advantage), then a reasonable price concession will be made by providers to preserve that volume.  

However,  Oscar's new internal products could enable Oscar to radically change these competitive realities and achieve the best of both worlds: charge premium prices (as if they had a broad network), but operate with a cost advantage because the network will be much less expensive to construct due to its inherent narrowness. I call this advantage **differential margin**. In this situation, they maintain competitive advantage as compared to current low-cost, bare-bones products by being able to charge higher prices due to their value added services, while they maintain an advatange vs. higher-cost, more expansive products by operating with lower costs.  And for Oscar, if they are able to execute this strategy, the benefits continue to accrue as they scale. If the products they are building add as much value to the core insurance product as they theoretically believe, Oscar's customer acquisition costs  and churn should be lower than industry average. In this situation, acquiring and keeping customers would be easier for Oscar than for competitors, which will allow them to scale in new markets and thus continually lower cost of their network, benefitting from the same scale effects that incumbents currently do. 


While this all sounds rosy, dominant strategies that radically change industry economics as described above are very, very difficult to execute properly. So to explain why I think Oscar has a good change to be able to pull this off, I have to **identify the sources of the differential margin** and demonstrate that, to paraphrase great buinsess strategist David Teece,  Oscar can create a **tight appropriability regime** around those elements of the product that can form the basis for a moat (other competitors shouldn't be able to imitate the new 'internal' products easily). 

I think the main source of differential margin will derive from their successful deployment of their **Care Routing and Concierge Services**
 
### Why Becoming a Switch Can Hold Competitive Advantage

Concierge care, which describes a relationship with a PCP held on retainer or paid a monthly subscription fee to provide much more personalized care, is not a new idea. In person, there are some physicians that charge up to $40,000 per year for concierge services. Additionally, new 'brick and mortar' direct primary care (DPC) services have arisen to try and implement the principle of 'beefed up primary care', embodied in companies like Qliance, Forward, ChenMed, Iora, etc. And on the virtual side of things, companies like Better and Sherpaa Health have created virtual nurses/PCPs that can both offer advice about where/when to seek care 

But Oscar is thus far one of the only insurers that has internally built and developed a virtual PCP-concierge service (messaging and calling based) as an integral part of its insurance offering. The idea is to get individuals to avoiding using healthcare services for low-acuity conditions and to have them seek out Oscar's own physcians for advice on where to begin care for longer episode. While most insurers have caught on to the trend and contract with telemedicine operators to provide this service for its members,  most legacy providers can't do much actual care delivery virtually. They can't order labs, order prescriptions, or refer, solely through the telemedicine platform, and so the reccomendation they pretty much always have is to see a physician in person (how useful!). Due to these limitations Oscar actually built its own system to allows its PCPs to review charts, prescribe, order tests, and refer - all through its application. The data bears this out. Oscar physicians refer to the emergency room or urgent care center less than other telemedicine vendors (9.6% vs. 3.6%), and can solve low-acuity conditions virtually much more effectively than general vendors (see the report). And according to the company, compared to the pitiful utilization rates for telemdicine services amongst incumbents (~14%), around 44% of Oscar's members originate their care inquiries with Oscar telemedicine services, especially important for higher-acuity episodes. The data from higher acuity episodes is positive too. Oscar notes that of the 10% most sick members, 90% contact the concierge team - a great leading indicator of their models' success in higher acuity episodes that can actually drive down utilization rates.

Taken to its logical extreme, telemedicine-based concierge medicine (whether messsage-based or video based) with effectitve prescribing, lab-ordering, and referral capabilities becomes **a convinient, quick switch** for effective care routing, ensuring that members:
1. Only get care when they really need it, immediately reducing low-value  utilization.
2. Are aware of and seek out high-value networks of physicians. That is, they see providers who are high-value themselves and who refer to high-value providers. Given that it's very difficult to interrupt care episodes once they've already begun, even if compelling alternatives exist, making sure that care originates at Oscar's app is the critical milestone that has to be reached.

There are key advantages to care routing as described above:

1. It adds substantial value to the insurance product offering (thus enabling higher prices) in the form of convinience and lack of hassle. With virtual conversations that can handle a broad variety of health inquiries, there are fewer delays in getting quick answers to health questions and meaningful engagement from actual physicians when serious intervnentions are necessary. That level of convinience and access to physicians is unheard of in the industry today, where wait-times for PCP visits can be over 50 days in some supply constrained regions. 
2. It immediately improves gross margins by reducing low value care utilization either by eliminating it entirely, or ensuring that patients are beginning care in high-value, low-cost referral networks (assuming they can be identified and constructed). This lowers the dollar amount of claims paid out.
3. Lastly, broad utilization of software-based care routing also implies a radically different level of **trust** in an insurer to make explicit care recommendations. That level of trust is **only** possible with Oscar's product and focus on putting member experience first - they just don't exist at incumbent insurers. Think about it - would you call your insurer to tell you where to find care now? I wouldn't. This trust and belief that most care engagement should begin with your insurance company is powerful because it drastically increases the leverage that Oscar has both over its suppliers as well as customers. In this situation it's Oscar that at least partially owns the customer relationship, not the provider. That's a really radical shift in the healthcare landscape. Currently, insurance companies' ability to modulate care seeking activities have traditionally been mediated through the blunt tools of benefit design, which while effective at times, doesn't engender much in terms of a relationship between the insurance company and the member. They don't really interact with customers in a way that could be defined as a traditional customer relationship. Oscar will. If an insurer really does own the consumer relationship in healthcare, then not being a part of that insurer's network will be a mortal danger for providers, enabling price concessions. The reason is simply that with higher trust, an insurer's ability to drive volume away from a given provider is magnified, enabling lower prices. Given that the commercial populations Oscar serves are characterized by wide variations in prices, this might be the most important value added aspect of Oscar's internal products.


Care routing thus creates the potential for differential margin. But remember, in addition to creating a differential margin, Oscar's product must impose barriers to imitation from competitors. What might those be? 

1. Trust imposes natural **switching costs**. Enterprise software companies have been utilizing switching costs to ensure that their products are sticky for years. Once users have reoriented their routines around a particular product, they are loathe to change unless the benefits of doing so are blatantly obvious. Thus in the absence of insurance companies suddenly offering new services that vastly dwarf the value of Oscar's services (unlikley given existing insurance companies' NPS scores), it's unlikely Oscar will be displaced. The value this offers as a function of reducing churn could be massive. 
2. Existing insurance companies don't generally have the capabilities to run robust customer engagement programs necessary to spur the necessary utlization of these services. Again, look at the industry average NPS score. It's just not what they're built for. 
3. It's unclear whether incumbents have the capabilities to build consumer facing software with these capabilities. It's possible that, should Oscar's success lead to sustained profitability and more than marginal share gains, then existing companies will scramble to respond. But even then, building a software company is different than building an app.
4. **Indirect demand-side networking effects** in virtual care utilization. The more individuals actively using Oscar's primary care services as an entry point to the healthcare system, the greater the value of being in Oscar's network to providers. This is essentially the same scale advantage incumbent's leverage, but much more potent in nature, since the trust implied by high utilization of the care routing product is a more precise, high-fidelity way of steering patients, compared to the blunt methods used by insurers today.  




## Oscar's Future


Ultimately, everything I've just written paints a pretty picture of Oscar's future. But it's all just words out of the mouth of one analyst. The data, expressed as their market share and differential margin will either confirm my hypothesis or prove me wrong.

I believe they've taken the right steps to implement a strategy that can position them to be a profitable insurer for the long run. I'm also encouraged by both financial (their MLR is finally on track to be less than 100%, although we'll have to wait for their official filings to be sure) and non-financial indicators that their business model is working.

But I do have concerns. I'm still not sold on their ability to scale. Tory Wolff's recent post on Amazon's ambitions in healthcare (mine will be coming soon, I promise) mentioned one critical reason why innovators in healthcare usually get thoroguhly trounced by incumbents. That is, factors like incentive misalignment, information asymmetry, highly scaled incumbents, and local market entry barriers ensure that **share shifts are glacial**. I'm pretty sure that once Oscar's prodcts add value and consumers, once acquired, will be willing to pay for quick, convenient access to the healthcare system as an add-on to their traditional insurance payments. And I definitely think, having seen both Oscar's product in action and the statistics to back up their claims, that Oscar will have lower churn than traditional commercial insurers. But the fact remains that healthcare consumers are conservative. In fact, as I mentioned above, one of the biggest reasons I think Oscar is well positioned to succeed in building a care routing swtich, in the same area where others have failed, is because their business model wraps what's essentially a different product category - care routing switches - in a package that consumers are used to shelling out money for. But that conservative nature of the market also makes me question their ability to gain market share quickly. I still don't see what Malay Gandhi referred to as "the ability to use technology to gain a scalable distribution advantage". That being noted, there is some data to assuage my concerns. They are on pace to get close to a 260,000 members in 2018 (up 250% from 2017) and their market share currently stands at anywhere from [8 - 60%](https://www.pressreader.com/usa/modern-healthcare/20180212/281788514519130) depending on the market. And far from competing with the mega-insurance giants I mentioned earlier - Oscar is still laser focused on the commercial exchanges, a market most of the biggest players have abandoned. So it could be that my concerns are unfounded. Still, until I see a graph of consumer acquisition costs per cohort and can build a LTV model, I'm never going to be entirely sure.





http://reconstrategy.com/2015/09/can-convenience-care-be-a-platform-for-an-insurance-product/

www.politico.com/states/new-york/albany/story/2017/08/30/oscars-numbers-d
http://www.modernhealthcare.com/article/20180206/NEWS/180209938
https://medium.com/@chrisdenoia/oscar-kim-kardashian-and-mlrs-a22232dfe0a9
https://www.forbes.com/forbes/welcome/?toURL=https://www.forbes.com/sites/stevenbertoni/2016/02/22/oscar-health-gets-400-million-and-a-2-7-billion-valuation-from-fidelity/&refURL=&referrer=#45b0d2195321
https://www.cbinsights.com/research/oscar-health-insurance-strategy-teardown-expert-intelligence/
https://www.wired.com/2017/05/one-startup-built-better-health-insurance-magic-data/
https://www.hioscar.com/blog/a-new-kind-of-health-insurance-network
http://www.modernhealthcare.com/article/20161015/MAGAZINE/310159989
https://pdfs.semanticscholar.org/62a5/6cb47ec0a181da67358662446ab7d544c01f.pdf
https://www.beckershospitalreview.com/payer-issues/10-things-to-know-about-oscar-health-insurance-will-it-be-the-uber-of-health-plans.html

https://hmpi.org/2017/09/08/scenario-planning-tools-for-organizations-struggling-with-healthcare-reform-uncertainty-the-case-of-oscar-health-insurance/
https://www.wired.com/2017/01/oscar-is-disrupting-health-care-in-a-hurricane/
https://hmpi.org/2017/09/08/scenario-planning-tools-for-organizations-struggling-with-healthcare-reform-uncertainty-the-case-of-oscar-health-insurance/




