

Every venture capitalist has a unique way of thinking about the success and failure of startups. For example, Sequoia has a famous presentation that details theirs. Generally, though I've found them to be 



First let's handle the imprecision regarding markets. If you read my last article, you'll remember that I like to define markets not in terms of the dollars spent on a particular product category, but by the  dollars spent on the problem,need,or want that a certain set of products meets.

The reason I do this is becasue it allows me to create a clear typology of startups based on the market that they are targeting - that is, the type of problem they solve. We begin with a startup and a novel product category (which I will define very broadly; a startup trying to commercialize a product that exists, but paired with a novel revenue model, e.g. Salesforce's pioneering of the SaaS business model counts in my framework as a 'new product category') that it hopes to sell with the goal of maximizing the firm's cash flows. 

Then, I categorize startups into 3 types, based on the problem that they are solving. The first category of startups consists of companies that are targeting an **existing problem, want, or need of a set of consumers with a novel product category**. In this sense, that the market 'exists' indicates that consumers are _aware of the problem, want, or need they have_, are _meeting that want/need with whatever existing solutions they are able to access_, and  _will recognize if a new product category solves that problem more effectively_. Alternatively, startups can target 'new markets'. There are 2 ways they can do this. The first involves a **startup seeling a new product that solves an truly new need or want (one that  did not exist before) or is so revolutionary in its capabilities, that it unearths a latent need, problem, or want in individuals**. An example of the former was Cisco's multiprotocol router, which solved the problem of incompatible communication accross LANs, a new problem that didn't exist prior to the growth of LANs(often, fundamentally new problems are created out of the growth of other new products). An example of the latter is VMWare's OS Virtualization product, which was so revolutionary that it convinced CIOs to change their business practices becacuse they were made aware - by VMWare's product - of a new want. The second way a startup can target a new market involves a **startup providing a solution for those _potential_ customers who have a need or want that already exists, but who can't use an existing solution for some reason (cost, complexity, location, etc.)**. This is described very lucidly in Clayton Christensen's book _The Innovator's Solution_. Basically, when targeting existing markets, a startup must 'shift' spend from existing solutions to their new product category. When targeting 'new markets', a startup has to create spend. 

There are a couple of things to note about this typology. Firstly, I like this typology because, so far as I can see, it's _completely exhaustive_. Because it's defined from first principles, there _shouldn't_ be a startup that doesn't fit into one of those three categories (although I welcome attempts to break it). Secondly, the categories are _not_, nor should they be, mutually exclusive. The best product categories, the one that have been the foundation for companies worth tens of billions of dollars, eventually end up falling into at least two, sometimes all three categories. From the perspective of a venture investor though, what really matters is which category the startup's product category fits into _first_, at the very earliest stages of its development. It's very difficult to project when a product category can be so transformative as to fundamentally solve many problems for many target groups of custoemrs, and thus it's probably not good to count on that happening. Rather the initial market the startup targets should support venture-scale outcomes. Thirdly, the lines between the categories can get a bit fuzzy, mainly based on what one considers to be the actual problem/need/want that is being solved. This problem - which I call the problem of abstraction - is tough to get around since capitalism is inherently a social process and thus, the definitions of problems aren't objective, but defined by a social process.  Lastly, another reason why explicitly mapping the typology of different categories of startups is important is because the factors that govern the success of startups I think will drastically change depending on which type of market the startup's product category attempts to sell into. 

The first factor that gets drastically affected by market type, and thus bears me explaining before I get into the description of the framework properly, is the type of competitors that a startup will face.  In fact, one of the reasons I made this F/W was because I didn't like that the words 'incumbent' and 'competitor' were tossed out with imprecision. I define 3 types of competitors that a startup may or may not have to face. The first are **indirect incumbents**. These firms market products that form the existing set of solutions for a given problem, need, or want. For Uber's ridesharing product, taxi drivers (and their operating companies) were the indirect incumbent. As you can see, there is no requirement that incumbents be large, profitable corporations with a strong engineering or product development capability sets - they _can_ be of course, but there is no requirement as such in my framework. In Porter's Five Forces F/W, considering the startup as the protagonist of analysis, the indirect incumbents be analagous to substitutes to the startups' product category; to the incumbents', the startup's product category is the substitute to their products. The second type of incumbents are **adjacent** incumbents. Adjacent incumbents define a broad set of players that make products and services that operate in adjacent industries to the startup. For Netscape, one adjacent incumbent was Microsoft. Microsoft's core product, Windows and Office, did not solve the same problem that browsers did, but Microsoft operated in an adjacent market. These incumbents, while not always dominant and profitable (they might be struggling to survive and thus forced into the startups market), often are. They also are usually marked by similar capability sets as the startup, which makes them extremely dangerous opponents - even if they are not operating in your market now, they pose a legitimate threat of entry. For example, when people speak of Google, Facebook, Amazon, etc., as competitors, most of the time they are referring to their capabilities as adjacent incumbents. Young startups are probably not competing against Google's Search Product directly or indirectly (as substitutes to it), but Google could, if it decided to, build the product category the startup is also building, only with many more technical and monetary resoures.  Additionally, note that an adjacent incumbent can also be an indirect incumbent and vice versa. The last competitor category consists not even of incumbent per se, but consist of **direct competitors**, companies (often startups) that compete in the same market as a startup. 

With these types of competitors and markets in mind, we can move to the framework. I'll note at the outset, that this is _not_ a people-centric framework. Rather this framework tries to 


To me, the success of a startup comes down to 2 fundamental questions, which themselves have a bunch of subquestions to answer. The first question is, "Can the startup prove that a large number of individuals want the new product category?". The second question is, assuming the first quetion is answered affirmatively, "Can the startup build barriers to entry that allow it to capture an outsized portion of the value creation occuring in that product category?" These two questions correspond to the value creation and value capture parts of the startups' life cycle. 

Let's start with the first question. 

## Value Creation 

You're evaluating a new startup. They have, or are trying to develop, a product. Before they can show that people are willing to hand the company money for that product, the team you're considering backing doesn't have a business. It's that simple.

To to understand whether people will hand the company money, the investor first must understand what problem the product is solving. As we discussed earlier there are three answers to this question for each problem, need, or want, the startup can solve. There will likely be more than one (and, if _Crossing the Chasm_ is to believed, sometimes even up to 20). But let's zoom in on a single problem, need, or want that the new product category solves. 

If the problem, need, or want the startup is addressing is fundamentally new, or the startup is deliberately targeting a group of individuals who caannot access existing solutions, then there are, by definition, no existing solutions for the startup's product category to compete against! This is great, because it means the first challenge of a startup can be simple - build something that solves the problem people have. You don't have to compete against the indirect incumbents and their existing products. 

In this case, the difficulty of this seemingly simple edict - build something that solves the problem people have - derives from uncertainty surrounding several key questions. 

Firstly, what _is_ the problem that customers have? After all, it's _new_, and hence customers probably won't know immediately that they even have this problem. That's a risk you take when you go after a nascent problem space.  This is particularly true for companies commercializing product categories that are so revolutionary as to unearth latent needs/wants/problems. Take Snapchat for example. In retrospect it was clear that the problem Snapchat's product 'unearthed' in people was a desire for authentic communication. But it was not clear that was something people wanted prior to the product being launched. Answering this question is much easier if you're simply targeting potential customers who can't access existing solutions. 

Secondly, how many people are going to have this problem? Remember, this is a _new market_, and so it only exists in its earliest stages, and thus it's very hard to size. It's small now, by definition, but it could be massive later - or not. Even if you're targeting a problem that people are aware of, but targeting the potential customers who can't access existing solutions, it's very difficult to project how many 'potential' customers would use existing solutions if they could. 

Thirdly, what is the consumers' willingness and ability to pay? In existing markets, one can clearly focus on the magnitude of the pain point that is being solved by the new product category as a proxy for their willingness to pay. You can focus on the structure of the buyers to see whether they have the ability to pay. The answers to these questions are less clear when the problem is new or you're selling to customers who have no prior history of being able to use solutions for their problem. 

Together, these three questions can be bundled under the term, " new market risk". The reward these startups get for taking a risk on a market that is nascent, or even nonexistent, is that there is little to no competition from indirect incumbents. And, because of the market risk, there will likely be little interest from adjacent incumbents and very weak competition from direct entrants. I can't stress how important this ability to develop free from competition is. 

But not all companies can address fundamentally new problems, or be so lucky as to have a product that is so radical as to unearth a new need/want. . Some of the largest areas of needs and wants, and hence markets, (think transportation, agriculture, medicine, etc.) already exist and as a result, are served by the solutions of indirect incumbents. In fact some of the most important companies ever - notably General Electric, and even Fairchild Semiconductor - got started doing exactly this. The presence of the existing solutions of indirect incumbents adds an extra layer of complexity to the question of building something that people want. Specifically, the previous edict becomes, "Build something that people want much more relative to existing solutions". That extra addendum refers to the idea of **displacement**. When solving problems, needs, or wants that are already served by indirect incumbents, a startup's new product category must not simply be something that someone might use. Rather, to capture a meaningful amount of the consumer spend on a problem (and thus get a lot of cash flow), the product has to _completely displace_ the existing product category somehow. So, how can we reason about whether a new product category will be able to displace existing solutions?

### A Theory of Displacement Competition

This idea of displacement is crucially important for startups who are operating in existing markets. I came to think about this question mainly because my investing focus is deep-technology and biotechnology, two areas where the problems/needs are often well defined, and there are many indirect incumbents to grapple with. 

Displacement/Entry risk to me answers the question: "Can this company make something that a lot of people will buy, even if that requires a large shift in spend away from existing products?". It is about whether a startup can establish product/market fit so strong that the startup will drag spend away from incumbent product categories so rapidly that it will experience a 'tornado' of demand (which should also happen for startups targeting new markets, I should note).

Note that this is less a question about the specific startup relative to its direct competitors (competitors making the same product category) and more about the _product category_ the startup is pioneering relative to the existing product category. I call this **"displacement/substitute competition"** to distinguish it from **direct competition** between firms And therein lies the problem. There is a whole host of strategy literature that describes how individual firms can generate competitive advantage relative to other direct competitors. There is much less literature describing the conditions under which displacement is possible.

Fortunately, some of the same fundamental tools we can use to reason about firm competitive advantage can be modified to describe displacement/substitute competition, namely the fundamental drivers of cash flow:  price, value (to customer), and costs.  I define 4 factors that can control the liklihood that a new product category can displace an old one:

1. Price/Performance Trajectories.
2. Switching Costs.
3. Product Category Networking Effects.
4. Brands

The first and most important aspect in determining whether a new product category can displace an existing one for a problem, want or need is the relative price and performance trajectories of the new category relative to the old one. A new product category can begin as more expensive or cheaper than the existing product category, and can underperform or outperform on a set of performance metrics that are relevant for solving the problem or meeting the need in question. For any given problem, there isn't only one performance metric that a consumer uses to judge overall performance, and as Ben Thompson has astutely pointed out many times, the performance metric doesn't have to be quantifiable either. Just as relevant as the price/performance comparison of course is the _trajectory of improvement_ for each of these dimensions, which can change the competitive dynamics of substitute competition drastically. For example, home incandescent electric lighting started out by outperforming gas lighting on a host of dimensions - quality of light (brightness), a lack of noxious gases, etc. - but it also was very expensive. As the technology matured (from DC plants to AC plants with transformers and inverters) howevered, the technology was able to become much cheaper, displacing gas lighting entirely. 

A good rule of thumb that VCs always throw out with regard to this is that a new product category should be "10X" better/faster/cheaper. However, I'm not sure this is a good rule of thumb. At what level of 'better/faster/cheaper' does a new product category It's still an open question in my mind, and I'm quite sure 

The second factor to consider is switching costs. This is a _vitally important_ factor to consider. Most VCs and founders are very familiar with the idea of switchng costs with respect to direct competition. The idea is the same here, except that the number of ways a product category can create switching costs exceeds the number of ways 


### Indirect Incumbent Reactions

Unfortunately for a startups, capitalism is dynamic. Thus, incumbents will eventually be given the chance to respond to a startup introducing a new product categories. What are the ways in which they can do this? Note that my answer to this will regard _only_ the incumbents existing solutions for a specific problem - their existing market. 

I think a 2x2 matrix helps think about the potential outcomes. On the first axis is 'degree of displacement': high or low. On the second axis is the 'incumbent response': exit existing product category or maintain position in  existing product category (which can either come by completely ignoring the new product category or by responding to the new product category via improvements in the their existing products).

If the startup's new product has low displacement, there won't be a tornado of demand shifting from the existing product category to the new one, and so it's highly unlikely that an indirect incumbent will exit the existing product category. It _is_ possible that, should the startups' new product category also grow in a new market (remember that more than one is possible), that the indirect incumbent - if they also are adjacent incumbents and thus have the capabilities to develop or acquire the new product category - could enter the new market to compete with the startup 'on its home turf'. If this does occur, the question of what barriers to entry the startup has been able to erect becomes relevant, a question for the 'value capture' section of the piece. But without the existential threat of their existing product categories becoming obsolete relative to the startups' new product, the incumbents will not exit the presumably cash flow positive existing product category. Thus, if the startup has low displacement, the most likely outcome is simply that the incumbent maintains its position, maybe at best improving the product slightly to ward off any potential price/performance trajectory improvements in the startups' product category.

If however, the startup's new product has successfully started to shift spend, then the incumbent is faced with a choice. It can exit the the product category, choosing to do something else altogether or compete _directly_ with the startup (note that if they choose to do this, the indirect incumbent becomes a direct competitor). Additionally, it could decide to try and ignore or fight the displacement, maintaining its position in the existing product category. Despite how irrational the later seems, one _can_ see this happen in the historical record, as theories like Clayton Christensen's Disruption Theory demonstrate to us.

Of course, none of this actually tells you _why_ an incumbent would take any of these choices. I have given this some thought. But unfortunately, this piece 






This is where I think Christensen's Theory of Disruptive Innovation presents a helpful, if incomplete, guide. Christensens's theory describes one way new product categories can displace old ones. He notes that when a new solution to a problems arrives, it's can be cheaper, worse than the existing product category along one set of performance dimensions, but much better along alternative performance dimensions. This set of characteristics allows the new product category to access a set of potential customers. Initially, it can get at these potential customers because serving them would violate the economics of the existing product category - they are outside the purview of indirect incumbents. Then as the performance trajectory of the new product category improves, it can ultimately 'suck' customers out of the old product category into the new one, leaving the old indirect incumbents out to dry. 

Now note that I'm cheating a bit here. I previously defined the act of "targeting potential customers who were unable to access an existing solution set but would like to", as creating a new market in my last article. So technically Christensen's Theory is an example of a company targeting a _new market_, which doesn't answer the question I posed. The princples however, are what matter here. As I mentioned at the end of the last piece, truly great product categories do a bit of all 3 catetgories of market entry or creation - they just do it in different orders.  Smartphones provide an example of where a new product category (smartphones, led by the iPhone) started by immediately displacing a whole _host_ of existing solutions (not just existing mobile phones) for existing needs/wants for an existing market, but ended up converting potential customers to actual customers as the product category got cheaper. Christensen's Theory is simply meant to demonstrate that product cateogry displacement and resulting spend shift _is_ possible.

So how should VCs think about whether a new product category is likely to displace existing solutions? Well first, as Christensen's lesson shows, if you can start out selling into a set of potential customers, who for some reason, are unable to access existing solutions (not necessarily because they're too expensive - for any reason really) - do it, because it will give the startup time to grow without having to shift spend much. But if not, the rule of thumb VCs like to say, is make sure your product category is 10x better or cheaper than existing solutions - or can get there. 10x might be an arbitrary number, but the point isn't the number so much as the idea that when you have to directly take on indirect incumbents, you better bring a new product category to the table so much better than existing solutions that it can overcome the barriers keeping the existing product category entrenched.

Unfortunately, no good treatment exists to discuss what these barriers are, and to provide any more depth than the "10X Better or Cheaper" rule. A lot of energy has gone into defining the barriers to entry within a given product-market, economies of scale, networking effects, cornered resources, brand, learning economies, etc. However, these sources of competitive advantage don't always apply when considering a battle between two product categories. I'm going to try though. 

The last question that I would want answers to regarding a startups' ability to enter a market is as follows: "Why aren't indiret or adjaent incumbents launching this product category as we speak?" 

## Barrier Risk 

So now you have a product that a lot of people want to buy. You've displaced the existing solutions if there are any, and you're in the classic 'tornado' of demand.. Just keep the foot on the gas until you're Google right? Unforunately, no. The good thing is that generally, the tornado of demand, especially if the market is large, brings tons of revenue to a startup. The bad thing is that to ensure that this revenue 59 

