
Invest in big markets. It's a venture statement that's repeated so often that it's almost cliché. Marc Andreesseen says you should do it. So does Andy Rachleff. And of course, one of the VCs enshrined in the pantheon of mythology, Don Valentine, originated the idea that as a VC, one should invest in startups that are targeting big markets.

The reasons why are numerous - I'd encourage you to just go read the posts I linked to - but they can basically be summarized as so. A great market, one where there are lots of customers and they are willing to pay for a solution to their problem, pulls the right product out of a company. The product just has to be barely functional, meeting the bare minimum of requirements to fit the market need. The team simply has to be competent enough to get that basic, functional product out the door. 

That all made sense to me when I first read those posts. However, Valentine, is also fond of saying that he _doesn't_ invest in startups that create markets, citing the expense of doing so. It's at that point where I got a bit confused.

This line between market creation and market entry, fundamentally new markets as opposed to existing ones, confused me. The princple reason for this confusion is because depending on the level of abstraction used to define the market, almost any market can be said to both be new or already existing. Let me give you an example to illustrate this idea. Take Google. Because Google is a two-sided interaction platform, it actually has two products: the Internet search engine we all use daily (I'll stick to desktop to make it simple), and a keyword-based advertising product that gets shown against the results from the search engine. If you define the market Google operates in as "keyword advertising on the Internet", then Google _did_ create a market (or at least entered a new, emerging one). There's Valentine's thesis disproved already - the market was built by Google!  If you zoom out and say the market was "Internet Search", they probably didn't create the market- AltaVista and Yahoo created that market. In this case though, another problem emerges to challenge the "invest in big markets' thesis - the market, as quantified by number of dollars that could be made from internet search - was puny at the time, yet Google was still a great investment. Even if you say Google didn't create the market, the market that existed was tiny! The thesis is disproved once again. Now, if you move up a layer of abstraction and define Google's market as "Digital Advertising" on the advertisers side, they again didn't create the market, but they did _expand_ it considerably, incuding many small businesses who couldn't access digital banner advertising. On the user side, if you zoom all the way out and define the market as "information search and retrieval", then the market _definitely_ existed prior to Google. 

The Google example isn't unique - you can play the game with almost any new startup. Any new startup, if you define the market narrowly enough, is creating a market (or entering a new one). I call this lack of a well defined framework for what lens through which to view the idea of a 'market' the **abstraction problem**. 

There's another problem too. If we analyze the posts I linked to above, all of them analyze the past and look for explanations. Let's take Marc Andreessen's examples of great markets: search keyword advertising, Internet auctions, and TCP/IP routers. _Ex post_ of course, it's very easy to see that there were lots of paying customers for each of these markets. But _ex ante_, there were not a lot customers in those markets; internet auctions were made fun of particularly harshly for this very problem, especially when Meg Whitman moved to become the CEO of Ebay. So yes, invest in big markets is a good investment tactic, looking backwards. But it relies on being able to identify markets that are going to be big _ex ante_. I call this the **timing problem**. 

Now, this may all seem very unnecessary. Just agreeing that the eventual size of the market - the number of paying customers for a particular product  and the average amount they are willing to pay - should be large may be ebough for many practitioners. But for those interestred in my personal approach to resolving these problems, read on. 

## From First Principles

To begin answering this question, we have to start with the most basic question of all. **What is a market?** I like Geoffrey Moore's definition from _Crossing the Chasm_, a technology-investing classic. A market is "A set of _actual or potential customers_ for a given **set of products or services** who have a common **set of needs or wants**". 

I bolded and italicized the three key parts of the definition that can be used to help us solve the abstraction problem. Simply, markets can be defined by a combination of the one of the italicized elements and one or more of the bolded elements.
That is, it makes sense to talk about actual (or potential) customers for a set of products (which can serve one or many needs). It also makes sense to talk about a market as a set of actual (or potential) customers for a set of needs/problems/wants (which can be met by multiple competing products). And, most narrowly, it also makes sense to speak about a market as a set of actual (or potential) customers for a specific product meeting a specific set of needs/wants. We most often talk about markets as defined by the actual customers for a given product category or set of related product categories - the second definition given above. But, in my mind - and we'll come back to this later - a more useful way to view markets is through the lense of both the actual and potential customers who have a particular need/want. 

With this framework in mind, what might classify as creating a new market vs. investing in a big one?

Well firstly, let's start with the actual vs. potential parameter. A new market can be created when a startup "expands" a market by accessing customers who couldn't meet a need with existing products. Christensens' "new market" disruption theory features this definition at the center of the theory. It  defines new market disruption as a process by which a startup offers a new solution to a problem/need/want that can be accessed by a group of previously _potential_ customers due to increased usability, lowered price, new portability, etc. Converting potential customers into actual customers can be considered 'creating a new market', with the size of that new market being determined by two factors: the size of the potential pool of customers that could not meet their need with an existing set of products and the degree to which the new product category can "suck" the actual customers out of the old solutions and into the new ones. 

Secondly, although rare, new problems/needs/wants can be created that previously did not exist or make themselves obvious. This can come about at times as a result of problems/needs arising from other technologies, as well as because because a product arises that itself unearths a need that people did not know they needed solved (a 'latent' need per se). Multi-protocol Routing, made famous by Cisco, is a great example of this. The growth of LANs around the country, in which each network used different local protocols, introduced the problem whereby computers on the same campus couldn't exchange information (e.g. no email). Cisco therefore attacked a truly new market. In this case, this new want/need can be served by new or existing product and/or service categories. It's usually the case that these emerging wants are solved by new product categories, because if they can be solved by old product categories, it makes logical sense that incumbents would find these wants/needs and meet them with their existing products. Thus, it makes sense to say a startup creates a market if it launches a new product category that meets a need/problem/want that truly did not exist before.  

Thirdly, and most commonly, new product and service categories (i.e. I'm not referring to say, a new model of car, but rather a fundamentally new category of product, as recognized by society) emerge all the time, even if they target existing needs/wants. Take the emergence of electric lighting in the late 19th Century. The need/want was the same as for gas lighting - illumination of businesses and/or the home. But the product categories (and technological system) used to meet that want was radically different from the existing solutions.  Depending on whether you choose to define a 'market' by placing emphasis on _product_ or _need/problem/want_, this could be creating a market, or not. 

The framework I described above is advantageous because it's flexible. For example, one startup that Marc Andreessen argued 'created' a market was VMWare. The product, he argued, was "so profoundly transformative out of the gate that it catalyzed a whole new movement toward operating system virtualization, which turns out to be a monster market". I think this falls into category #2. No one knew they needed or why they would want tosupport multiple users of a single server. But once the product was created, the profound new abilities of OS virtulaization unearthed a latent need/want. That's market creation indeed. 

I also like it because it does't force an 'either/or' decision framework on each of these three categories. Some companies - indeed some of the best ones - fit into all three categories. They launch a new product category that simultaneously allows users to serve existing needs/wants in such a way that makes existing solutions obsolete, expands the potential market by allowing more people to access the new product category relative to the existing solutions, and can unearth a latent need that people did not know existed prior to the product being launched. 


## Returning to the Question of 'Big Markets'

So how does it reframe our discussion of that oft-repeated venture aphorism we discussed above?

I can't speak for Mr. Valentine or Sequoia Capital, but the framework I have created makes a couple of things clear.

1. If "Invest in big markets" is intended to be defined by the product category, i.e Internet search, or electric lightng, etc., then the statement has to be amended to better reflect history and Sequoia's own investing practices (as well as that of every VC who makes this statement). Very few startups launch a product in a product category that has a large market that exists already at the outset, and if they do, I'd be curious to understand why they believe they can succeed. Rather, one can say, "Invest in companies making products for which you believe the market will eventually be large, even if small at the time of investment". This, I think solves the problem quite succintly by putting the onus on the VC to have a belief, or early data to suggest, that the market for the specific product category the startup is producing and selling will be large. That could be growth rate of the product-category's sales. But it could also be some proprietary domain knowledge.  
2. If "Investin big markets" is intended to be defined by the size of the need/problem/want - I wholly agree that it makes sense to talk about investing in "big markets" without caveating that they might be small now. In this case, the statement just means "Invest in companies solving problems or meeting needs that a ton of people have and are aware they have." This can be constrasted to true market creation, in which the company might require the need/problem/want to be unearthed or emerge due to new technologies that cause another problem. 

What's my take on this oft-repeated aphorism? Well I think _ex post_ the idea that you should invest in a large market is obvious. I can also get behind interpretation #1 I proposed above. More generally, I'm in _agreement_ with Sequoia, Mr. Andreessen, and Mr. Rachleff that it is the "market" that governs startup success more so than other factors. When I think about a startup and its chances for success, the _first_ thing I think about is the problem/need/wants the startups' product can solve (or unearth), the number of individuals who have that problem (and their growth rate), the willingness of these individuals to pay for a solution should one provide itself, and the strength of existing solutions. 

However,  I will stake one original point of view. I don't think that startups creating markets are inherently more expensive or disadvantaged relative to those entering markets. To see why, I'll go back to the fact that I base my definition of "markets' on the problem/need/want being solved by a product rather than the product category itself. Thus, I see 2 situations in which a startup can really 'create' a market; by converting potential customers into actual customers and by unearthing a new need/problem/want (often because a new product creates new problems or because the need was hidden and truly unearthed by the startups' product category). I don't consider the third category, in which a startup launches a new _product category_ (which could be radically technically different from existing solutions, or based in a similar engineering base) that meets a need which people already identify with, to be market creation. With this established, you can basically point to startups that were successful taking all three approaches; there are advantages to both. 

The biggest advantage of market creation over market entry has been pointed out to me by NYC Angel Investor Jerry Neumann, and initially catalyzed my thinking about this topic of market creation vs. market entry. Basically, when one is creating a market, either because they are converting potential consumption into actual consumption or because they are unearthing a new need/want, is that there is a level of 'Knightian Uncertainty'  associated with entering that new market that will forestall big companies (no matter where they come from or what their capability set) from turning their turrets on a small startup and blowing them out of the water. I am not under the illusion that small companies are the only companies thAt can innovate. Big companies - and not just Facebook, Google, Amazon, and Apple - have always been innovative and launched new products, many of which we use every day. And they will compete with you once you show them the way (just ask the CEO of PepsiCo) and derisk the market. Thus, a startup that does not want to throw its chances of success to the winds of fate should think heavily about why a large company would be strucutrally incentivized to not enter a market or be unable to do so. One structural disincentive is the risk inherent in new markets; market that are new are by definitions uncertain (as compared to _risky_) and thus cannot be sized or analyzed well. For startups, this lack of initial competition from well resourced big companies is a boon because it allows them time to find the right feature set, improve the product, grow, and with that growth establish the crucials facets of competitive advantage that will prevent big companies from entering the market successfully as the the risk associated with the size and lucrative nature of the new market are diffused over time. 

However, that doesn't mean that startups can't successfully enter markets where there is an existing solution set for a need/problem/want that people already identify with. The canonical example I always come back to is the case of electric lighting. The market, defined by the problem or want, already existed. People wanted lighting in their homes and businesses for nightitme work. There was an existing solution set, gas lighting, which was relatively expensive, only available in dense, urban, areas, and sucked (noxious fumes, flame risk, not actually great light). Although eventually electric lighting both expanded the market for home/business illumination by making it dirt cheap and by expanding geographically (although it took the establishment of AC systems to do so), it initially was more expensive than gas, but worth it because it was better than gas lighting. Thus, Edison's General Electric (as well as Westinghouse and Thomson-Houston) successfully attacked a market that was pretty well defined by making orders of magnitude improvements in the technological system and product category that met those needs, thereby rendering existing solutions obsolete. 

And ultimately, I think the best new product categories do a bit of everything, just in different orders. Because they end up being obsoletive - better and cheaper - towards existing solutions, they suck consumption out of existing solution markets and towards the new product category. They are also cheaper and thus conver potential consumption into actual consumption through market expansion. And _because_ they are so cheap or because the products do something that was impossible before, they often get used in applications we never knew would need the product category, unearthing new needs/wants along the way. The order in which a new product category accomplishes each of these outcomes however, may differ substantially. 

There still are interesting questions for me to answer though. Which order is best? Is there data to support which types of products have the highest success rates over time? And what is the minimum set of categories necessary to build a billion dollar company? I don't know, but hopefully I'll find out. 





