---
published: true
---

For the last couple of years, the healthcare industry - specifically focused on providers and insurers - has engaged in a truly remarkable number of mergers and acquisitions. For example, in the [last month of 2017 alone](http://www.modernhealthcare.com/article/20171226/NEWS/171229957) we witnessed mergers between the Ascension Health Providence and St. Joseph hospital systems, Advocate and Aurora Health Care, the continuing acquisition spree from UnitedHealth's Optum group, as well as the much discused $69 Billion acquisition of Aetna by CVS. More gloablly, [Kaufman Hall & Associates ranked 2017 as the most acquisitive year on record](http://www.modernhealthcare.com/article/20180127/NEWS/180129937/record-numbers-better-credit-in-2017-mamp-a-dealmaking) since they started compiling data on hospital and health system deals in 2000. Many of these mergers have been horizontal in nature: hospital chains are getting bigger by combining their assets in different states and insurers respond by trying (and generally failing) to combine in response to that very same provider consodliation But a new trend, not seen for a while, has also crept into the M&A landscape: **vertical mergers**. For example, physician groups, even relatively large ones, have continued to join local hospital-centered systems. Additionally, United Health Group's acquisition spree of independent physician groups (IPAs), ambulatory surigcal centers and urgent care centers, which has been ongoing since at least the 2011 reorganization of the Optum subsidiary, also continued with its $4.9 Billion acquisition of DaVita Group's outpatient care assets. CVS and Aetna on the other hand joined to create one of the first (if not **the** first) combination of insurer, PBM, pharmacy chain & distribution, as well as a network of retail clinics. While vertical integration isn't a new phenomeonon - in healthcare or elsewhere - it's clear  that the healthcare value chain is changing. But questions remain as to how the different existing players are changing and why they are choosing to do so. Here I hope to explore the strategic context surrounding vertical integration to identify who wins, who loses, and why. 


## Trends toward Vertical Integration

Textbook treatments of the U.S. healthcare value chain generally divide into 5 functions, each occupied by a set of organizations:

- **End-payers**, in the form of governments (Medicare, Medicaid, etc.), individuals (made more important by the ACA exchanges), employers (both in the form of self-insured employers as well as those in the large-group market). These institutions ultimately foot the bill for healthcare services in one form or another. 
- **Fiscal Intermediaries** in the form of insurers, who offer a number of different types of products (HMOs, PPOs, wide-network plans), as well as Pharmacey Benefit Managers (PBMs). These organizations generally help blunt the high-cost of medical service for end-payers.
- **Providers** in the form of hospitals (inpatient), speciality surgical centers, outpatient care (physician clinics), pharmacy chains and newer types of delivery assets like urgent care centers, stand-alone ERs, etc. Each organization here takes on a different use case for the provision of healthare services and products to consumers. 
- **Purchasers**, like drug, medical device, and durable medical equipment (DME) wholesalers and group purchasing organizations (GPOs) that serve to bridge the gap between the products used in medical service and the service providers themselves.
- **Producers**, such as biopharmaceutical companies and medical device makers. They actually make the products used in varying types of medical care.

While the CVS-Aetna merger and the continued expansion of United's python-esque grip on U.S. healthcare take center stage as the notable vertical expansions in 2017,  the lines between different the nodes in the healthcare value chain stated above have been blurring for a long time now, catalyzed most often by regulatory change. 

The first thing we have to understand about this blurring is _the mechanism by which its occuring_.There are a couple of ways this trend towards value chain extension have been realized.

**Hospital Systems forward integrating by acquiring physician practices and other outpatient care assets.**

This trend might not be so much of a surprise in 2017. But wind the clock back to say, 1990, and there truly was a distinct organizational barrier drawn between small and mid-sized physician groups and more intensive inpatient care settings (usually owners of multiple hospitals organized into a 'health system', in which physicians were contracted or employed in a select number of specialties such as emergency medicine, radiology, anesthesiology, surgery, and pathology). However, as many once inpatient, and financially lucrative procedures began to migrate to outpatient settings like freestanding surgical and imaging centers, formerly inpatient-led organizations started to buy up smaller specialty physician groups to create 'networks' that could theoretically provide most - if not all - healthcare services. Building upon these acquisitions, recent years have seen the extension of these principals of verticalization to their logical conclusion:  acquisitions of PCP-practices, institutions that have been thus far laid claim to  the patient entry-point to the healthcare system. This forward integration has obvious financial advantages for health systems. 
1. As previously mentioned, it prevented the leakage of high-margin services to outpatient settings outside of the health system. 
2. Control of the PCP allows for control of referrals, ensuring that _patients_ don't leak outside of the walls of the healthcare system. 
3. The vertial consolidation allowed the hospital systems to gain market power that benefited them directly in negotiations with insurers. An insurer - even one with a narrow network product - has little in the way of leverage to extract price concessions if there is not a substitute provider to which the insurer can turn to. While horizontal integration did impact leverage as well, forward integration is also important in explaining market power beacuse it prevents the insurer from engaging in many individual negotiations with different (usually smaller) sites-of-care. Therefore, instead of being able to manage many smaller negotiations with provider groups for each type of care, the insurer is left with a 'take it or leave it' proposition for the entire vertical spectrum of care for its members, an undesirable position to be in with respect to negotiating leverage. 
4. Facility fees, which are payments made my Medicare (and thus, likely to be replicated by private insurers) for services conducted in outpatient settings that could be performed in a freestanding physician clinic, are available to hospitals that employ larger number of physicians in the outpatient setting. 
5. The re-emergence of value-based care payment models, specifically those embedded in the 2015 Medicare Access and CHIP Reauthorization Act,  provided yet another strategic (and marketing) motivation for vertical consolidation: **care coordination** and the **regulatory burden of reporting**. For smaller physician groups who have thus far held out against acquisition, the new Merit-based Incentive Payment System (MIPS) as well as the more advanced tracks of value-based payment, rely heavily on reported quality metrics which are onerous for small clinics to abide by. MedPAC clearly has been warned about these issues and is trying to compensate, but it's unclear whether their efforts will be successful. For larger systems, ACOs in particular make a pretty explicit monetary trade-off between specialist and inpatient services and primary care, arguing that we should be spending more on the latter. Thus, it makes sense for them to invest in the full-spectrum of care activities to try to control members utilization and healthcare costs. 

**Joint-Ventured Narrow Network Insurance Products.**

While the last section was all about health systems intergrating forward into parts of the care spectrum outside that of the traditional inpatient hospital, this section discusses trends that see providers integrating **backwards** into functioning as health plan sponsors in some form or another. Unlike the acqusition of outpatient care assets, this trend is probably newer to emerge. And because this trend is newer, the strategic logic surrounding these moves is not as fleshed out as it might be for the previous example. 

The form of backwards integration with the most interesting strategic dynamics comes in the form of a redo of an old concept: the narrow insurance product. Specifically, I refer to narrow networks insurance products centered around a **joint-venture between an insurer and a single provider system**,encapsulated within (and in part motivated by) a value-based payment structure. We've seen these types of deals explode onto the marketplace recently: As early as 2011, both the[Steward Health System](https://www.businesswire.com/news/home/20110916005090/en/Steward-Health-Care-Tufts-Health-Plan-Create)and the [Carillion Health System](http://reconstrategy.com/2011/03/revolution-in-roanoke-perspectives-on-the-aetna-carilion-deal-2/) made deals with insurers to sell co-branded health insurance products featuring one system as the network of providers. In Wisconsin in 2013, the[Aurora health-system and Anthem created a narrow network product for the public exchange](https://www.bizjournals.com/milwaukee/news/2013/09/09/anthem-blue-cross-taps-narrow-network.html). United Health then [responded](http://bit.ly/recon2013Sep15i) with another narrow-network ACO deal with Aurora's competitors. In 2014, Anthem launched the Vivity narrow network product to California consumers in order to compete with Kaiser Permanente, which already resembles a narrow-network insurance product with its fully integrated provider-insurer structure. And lastly, just this year, the insurance company Oscar Health launched a joint-venture with The Cleveland Clinic to sell co-branded insurance. 

It's easy of course to get lost in all the mind-numbing details and forget  how truly revolutionary - and odd - it is to see these types of products changing the value chain. Firstly, these products _explicitly restrict consumer choice of provider_, a fact that would seem startling to anyone who was alive for the HMO-backlash in the late 1990s and witnessed the level of distate consumers expressed for the narrow networks of yesteryear. In fact, with respect to some of the single-system deals (which allow customers to only see physicians within one system's network without prior authorization), these new products are even more restrictive than older HMOs. Secondly, these products are **provider-led**. Providers realized from their failures to launch health-plans of their own in the late 1990s that they need insurance companies for their risk-management and administrative capabilities; hence the structuring of these products as joint-ventures as opposed to being led by the providers themselves. But make no mistake, these networks are provider led, with the networks being tightly coupled to a single, or a set of interconnected providers. And these types of products centered around a system that can meet all of the consumers' care needs would not have been possible without the trend of downstream/outpatient vertical integration described above. Thirdly, the impact of regulatory change cannot be understated. Most of these deals are structured based on value-based payment models (ACOs - it's unclear whether they are quality and cost-adjusted FFS models or more advanced partially-capitated models). Thus the goal of the provider-network is to generally reduce care utilization by reducing the use of low-value care, intervening early in high-cost patients to avoid unnecessary hospitalizations, etc. - all the trappings of ACOs writ large. 


For providers, this move towards narrow network products centered around a given provider system, while seemingly attractive, introduces a few new strategic challenges they must contend with:

1. Providers have to own the consumer relationship in a way that they just haven't had to before. Most of the JVs described above are co-branded in such a fashion to try to preserve the insurers consumer-facing orientation. But, even in a co-branded setting, employers and consumers will be facing a dramatically different choice with regards to their healthcare purchasing decisions. Instead of merely paying for a network and choosing a site of care for each episode of care, employers and employees will be _picking upfront_ between different competing provider networks. Insurers have been seen as the villains for premium increases and other consumer discontents (kind of like blaming cable companies for price increases when in reality they derive from the pricing power of cable networks like ESPN). What happens when the plan an individual buys is directly associated with one provider service? Who is the bad-guy now?
2. In this scenario, providers are taking on more risk than before and therefore have to develop the capabilities to operate in such an environment. While certain organizations with risk management capabilities like Kaiser, Mayo, and Geisinger, have experience managing costs, it's definitely not easy to transition into that model. Large provider systems might have the underlying assets to set up these narrow network products in such a manner that nearly all care types are included in the network. But, there is a certain degree of cultural and organizational effort that must go into managing costs more effectively across the entire care spectrum. Provider success in this regard will depend on how tightly they can couple their network around algined providers. A set of disconnected care assets that do not form any coherent whole management program will likely be unable to succeed in this regard. It is also important to note that the pricing power that these large systems will likely be able to weild over insurers using these products could offset these concerns in the short run.
3. Getting to scale in their narrow network products will be critical to the success of these products. When providers first tried to launch their own insurance products in the 1990s, many of them failed because the numbers of patients in their panels paled in comparison to the numbers needed support adequate distribution of risk through the population. 
4. The cost curve presents an existential risk to health systems. In high-risk populations with multiple co-morbidities and a corresponding high average cost of care( such as those found in Medicare Advantage (MA) populations) payment models based around principles of broad utilization reduction to achieve savings have seen examples of success. Consider CareMore, an existing insurer/provider combination with around $1.2 Billion in revenue and a demonstrated history of working in SNP markets and general MA plans, or the number of new payer enrants into the Medicare Advantage market. In commercial and individual exchange markets, it's unclear whether increases in overall healthcare costs are due primarily to prices, as argued for [here](https://www.nytimes.com/2018/01/02/upshot/us-health-care-expensive-country-comparison.html) and [here](https://www.brookings.edu/wp-content/uploads/2017/04/gaynor-et-al-final-report-v11.pdf), or due to broad overutilization, as argued for [here](https://randomcriticalanalysis.wordpress.com/2018/01/06/its-not-the-prices-stupid-a-response-to-austin-frakts-and-aaron-carrolls-nytimes-article/). ACO models as described in this section (system-lead) are _clearly_ built to achieve utilization reduction, not price reduction. In fact, the consolidation necessary to even consider a "single system" narrow network has created a substantial amount of market power that will in all liklihood cause prices to rise. If the cost curve does not bend over time, these large health systems will face calls for regulated prices and a move towards single-payer.

For payers on the other hand, the proliferation of these products is strategically troubelsome.

1. The consolidation of providers into large systems that are capable of launching JV, co-branded insurance products will lead to tougher rate negotiations.
2. There is a future - if the current trends play out to their logical extremes - in which providers directly compete with insurers in the commercial, Medicare Advantage, and individual marketplaces, offering narrow network plans that compete with insurer constructed networks. Given that insurers have taken the brunt of consumer 'bad blood' over the last three decades, and that consumers generally have a positive disposition towards care providers (even though they account for the lion's share of their medical expenses), this competition could be deadly for insurer market share. Thus it is in insurers' benefit to try to influence the market such that they remain in control of network construction amongst many different sites of care.  More on this later!
3. Operating as a partner offering risk management and adminsitrative services in the provider-lead narrow network product-market is not likely to be nearly as lucrative as commercial and Medicare-Advantage risk contracts. If more of the market shifts toward a provider-lead, narrow-network format, their overall margin structure will suffer. It's not clear exactly how payers are supposed to achieve competitive advantage in the narrow-network market. Theoretically, the savings produced by utilization reduction due to value based contracts must be divided between the payer and the provider; influencing the share such that more of it tips to the payer is a difficult strategic question to which I don't have much of an answer at the moment. 


So the future, if trends continue on the given track (always a risk in assuming so), does not necessarily inspire confidence for payers. But given that the payers in question are not likely to just concede and be relegated to commodity status, the question remains: **how are they going to adjust? **

The answers - albeit two vastly different ones - arrive in the form of UHG's acquisition spree and the new CVS/Aetna merger. 

## Two Very Different Bets on the Future of Healthcare

While many reasons have been given for the CVS/Aetna deal (as well as the UHG acquisitions), I think the most important one that is not often cited is to try to fend off against the trends that are threatening the payer business model. 

The central threat to the payer business model identified above functions only once several key assumptions are made:
- Large, vertically integrated and geographically dominant provider health systems own enough care assets across the care spectrum to function as entire networks for patients with minimal out-of-network contracting.
- There are only a few competing full-stack networks in any one local care geography to pick from, inhibiting the ability of insurers to adequately negotiate lower rates for care. Thus, any savings generated from value-based payment structures will disproportionately accrue to providers. 
- Consumers (individuals, MA, commercial large-group and small-group) disproportionately will favor a model in which they choose from competing provider networks in return for price reductions in premium revenue or due to the perceived superiority of the provider network in question. 

It just so happens that the acquisitions of UGH and CVS/Aetna function as direct attempts to undermine the assumptions under which the cloudy future of the payer business model is built.


### United Takes Integrated Care Delivery to the National Stage

The scope of UHG's clinical assets are somewhat startling. According to analysis by ReconStrategy's [Tory Wolff](http://reconstrategy.com/2017/12/uniteds-ambulatory-delivery-system-optumcare-can-reach-70-of-the-us-population/) as well as the 2016 United Health 10-K, United Healh maintains a care delivery arm that can reach 70% of the U.S. population with a variety of outpatient assets, including:
- Physician practices (IPAs) directly owned by Optum as well as those affiliated with Optum.
- Urgent Care Centers to address ER-level care at lower cost.
- Ambulatory Surgical Centers to support lower acuity, outpatient surgical procedures. 

The group employs or is affiliated with 20,000 physicians, and has a presence of at least one of these types of clinical assets in 70% of markets defined by "hospital referral regions". Factoring in UHG's recent acquisition of DaVita, ReconStrategy puts the total number of care delivery assets owned-by/affiliated-with UHG at 1728! See the ReconStrategy piece for more detail.

So clearly, United owns a **ton** of outpatient delivery assets. But why? What's the point? After all UHG is first and foremost a payer that operates in pretty much every known insurance market. $148,581 million out of the $184,840 million (80.3%) of UHG revenue derived from its insurance operations, not its Optum group. Due to the inherently low margin nature of insurance, the breakout of the earnings side is slightly better: $7,307 million arriving from insurance operations and $5,623 million from alternative source. But even of this $5,623 million, OptumHealth (the group that owns the delivery assets), was responsible for just $1,428 million in net income.

There are a couple of reasons that I can surmise for this spree of acquisitions:

1. The accumulation of delivery assets in an outpatient setting is clearly a bet on more care being taken out of hospitals. This trend, while supported by multiple astute observers of the healthcare market, also has the added benefit of undermining one of the key assumptions outlined above: that care delivery networks are defined and lead by hospital-based health systems like The Cleveland Clinic. As UGH as well as _other insurers_ try to steer patients away from hospitals for their care to reduce the negotiating leverage of the large systems, UHG stands to benefit.
2. UHG, by directly acquiring as well as providing services to independent physician groups, props up the independent physician segment of the delivery spectrum. It functions as an attempt to gradually slow the abandonment of independent practices for health-system acquisition by providing physicians with the tools and resources to practice independently (of course, with UHG's technology, capital, and backing). This complements the reason described in bullet point 1 - United is betting that most care can be removed from a hospital and that provider networks don't need a health system behind them to prosper. Who would've thought - UHG supporting the independent physician? In addition, by maintaining a source of independent physicians, UHG retains negotiating leverage on prices with large system to prevent them from engaging in the 'all or nothing' negotiation tactics that place payers at large disadvantages with respect to rates. It's all about **leverage**. It's not necessary that UHG gather a dominant market share of clinical assets in local markets. Rather, in its core markets, it just have to have _enough_ of a clinical footrpint such that the leverage effects for its core insurance business apply. In effect it will allow United to function as **the low cost provider** - at a permanent cost advantage vs. payer rivals. This market position is likely to be very valuable because providers will at first try to cost-shift any price reductions from UHG onto other insurers by demanding rate hikes. Other insurers suffer while UHG propsers. This is strategy at work.
3. In the worst-case, where soft-leverage tactics like the ones above fail, it's always possible for UHG to also create insurance plans with narrow-networks designed around Optum care facilities - thus directly (as opposed to indirectly) circumventing large provider systems almost entirely. And even in this case, it's completely unlikely that OptumCare sites exclude seeing patients with other insurers - they are distinctly _not_ trying to build an exclusionary narrow network in the guise of the provider-led networks described above. Part of what makes the strategy from UHG so brilliant in its nature is that it doesn't require a compromise of UHG's or Optum's existing business model; Optum is free to contract with any payer to provide healthcare serivces and UHG is free to negotiate with any provider.

So UGH, quite intelligently and in what I consider a brilliant exercise of corporate vision - remember that UHG started assembling care delivery assets as early as 2008, before we even knew that the ACA would pass- has invested in care assets that directly hedge against the worst-case scenario for payers: that they are turned into commoditized administrators for provider-led narrow networks. 

And I don't at all think that Optum is done. For one, they just acquired DaVita Medical Groups' outpatient assets (which are a mix of the three categories of outpatient assets listed above). In addition, but there still are some holes - both geographically (they're only in 70% of markets; although it could very well be that these are the most important markets to be in) as well as vertically in areas of the care delivery spectrum they don't currently own a position in. Namely, these areas include hospice care, stand-alone radiology clinics, stand-alone PCP clinics, etc. Filling in the holes in their delivery network would allow the noted leverage effects to be even more powerful as United would have a true 'substitute' at every level of the care delivery spectrum to use in rate negotiations with payers. 


### CVS and Aetna Bet on Becoming a Switch

At first glance, it appears that the CVS-Aetna merger was built to accomplish similar goals through acquisition of CVS's network of light-touch MinuteClinics. And it seems like the acquisition is extremely advantageous in that sense: in one fell swoop Aetna bought access to care delivery assets with an even larger geographic scope than UHG's:[82% of Americans live within 10 miles of a CVS store](https://qz.com/1146577/cvs-and-aetna-aet-82-of-americans-are-within-10-miles-of-the-pharmacy/), and 71% live within 5 miles. Compared to UHG's ~1700 locations, CVS Health owns 9700 retail locations (they only own 1100 clinics, but the ease of installationinto their own retail locations makes it likely that this number could balloon significantly). 

The caveat, of course, arrives in the form of _care intensity._ As UHG's acquistion of DaVita demonstrates, the company was much more interested in gaining density in its existing markets  with a set of three core outpatient care assets. In contrast to this, the only care delivery assets exclusively owned by CVS/Aetna are their set of retail MinuteClinics (which are also found in other retail locations apart from CVS, e.g. Target) and their pharmacy network (OptumRx is a PBM, and does not own nearly the number of pharmacy delivery assets). Thus, there are substantial gaps in the care delivery spectrum accessible to CVS-Aetna that likely prevent its care network from serving the same "soft leverage" and "price ceiling" roles as United's. So what role then does it play?


In short, Aetna/CVS is making a radical bet that it can become a switch for routing individuals into high-value, low-cost care experiences that lower the overall cost of care for its members (saving Aetna money) while also improving the value of CVS's retail locations. That is, rather than acquiese to provider narrow networks, Aetna wants to direct consumers to different sites of care, a model that can be adapted to value-based care all the same, but gives substantially more leverage to the insurer. Additionally, if CVS/Aetna succeeds, and they really do "own the frontdoor" to healthcare, then CVS/Aetna will have subverted providers in another critical way: consumers will give allegiance not to particular providers but to CVS/Aetna. 


Now, this is a story we've definitely been told before. To a certain extent, HMO plans as envisioned in the 1990s tried to do the same thing. In their case, they wanted the HMO-employed PCP to be the switch that tightly controlled the way patients utilized care, routing them to high-value providers. But, as noted above, the market rejected this overt level of control of consumer choice. Members loved their PCPs and wouldn't give them up. 

And yet it seems that constraints of past decades are less relevant than ever in this new healthcare value chain. For example, two distinct examples of beefed-up primary care serving as a care switch using tightly controlled specialist networks already exist. CareMore, already mentioned above, operates similarly in its Medicare Advantage plans. Iora Health does the same - operating as a MA plan that allows it to divert meaningful premium revenue to its primary care physicians and use explicitly exclusionary specialist networks to reduce the costs of specialist visits. 


From an optimists perspective, this deal is the way to get these approaches working at scale. Iora's NPS scores trounce that of UnitedHealh. CareMore has drawn near-universal praise. But all these approaches - like previous attempts to take any form of healthcare delivery national - are limited in scale. CareMore only operates in 8 states and covers around 100,000 patients. Iora only had 34 clinics in 2016. Scaling novel care delivery approaches as a startup means building a care delivery network from scratch accross the nation - something that incumbents like CVS or United have  more resources to do. And they're capital intensive (see how much Oscar, Clover Health, and Iora have raised thus far) businesses. But CVS's clinics are already deployed at scale. And thus if they can meet their own gauntlet, patients are likely to see the benefit nationwide. 

The devil however, is in the economic details of these arrangements. While CareMore and Iora serve as examples that primary-care heavy model can succeed in both improving patient experiences and lowering costs of care, there are also plety of failures to hold up alongside these canonical examples of success. The economics of these models is tough to make work. 

Kevin O'Leary wrote about the difficulties of making the economics of Direct Primary Care work [here](https://medium.com/@olearykm/the-cost-equation-for-new-primary-care-models-in-existing-frameworks-part-i-a31109f4dcbb) and noted  main challenges that CVS/Aetna will have to solve:

1. **Network Challenges.** Primary Care can only steer patients into the networks that the patient is contracted into. If the care-switch is not localized into the right low-cost network, this inherently limits and cost-savings that are available. This is less important for Aetna. As an insurer, it controls the construction of downstream network of specialists, imaging centers, and in-patient assets. That being said, the whole thesis of this blog - that provider systems are consolidating into 'take it or leave it' systems - resurfaces the problem of network construction.

2. **Data Operations.** As Kevin notes, the gap between knowing how to reduce low-value care _in theory_  and doing so _in practice_ is a chasm that very few have crossed. In fact,  many startups (Evolent, Aledade, any number of VBC-analytics startups) are trying to build the software and operational capability necessary to solve this very challenge. Does Aetna have it? Where will it get it? Can they do it in-real time? These are open questions that I'm not sure _anyone_ has solved in practice yet.  

3. **Time frame.** Churn in the health insurance business, particularly in the commercial sector that Aetna's likely going to be deploying this model in first, stands at one-year. Thus, even if these beefed-up switches of care do reduce costs, it's very likely that the insurer will not own the member long enough to realize the benefit. In fact, this very fact has been one of the largest impediments to startups trying to hawk their software and processes that claims to reduce utilization and therefore costs. Aetna is very active in MA populations, which typically have a longer-time-frame, and it could very well use that population as a way of bootstrapping the move into a more commercially challenging large-group/self-insured segment. But this is a key challenge that Aetna/CVS will have ot come to terms with.

Aetna will also have to deal with the challenge of **light touch.** Light touch - the lack of active primary care physicians in its retail clinics - seems great for making the economics work at first. After all, as noted by Kevin in that piece, the primary cost-center of any primary care focusede model comes in the form of PCP headcount. But there's also a reason that the successful examples I cited above - CareMore and Iora - explicitly invest in well trained primary care physicians. That investment seems to be a key ingredient to being able to accurately route patients into high-value patterns of care. It's not clear to me how Aetna/CVS is going to redirect patients to lower-cost sites for certain services or make intelligent decisions about when specialists are necessary without physicians. I'm all for empowering and unleashing non-physician medical personnel. But to say that you can build a primary care switch without primary care seems far-fetched. 

This is clearly what United believes. And in that belief the differences between the two insurers' approach to neturalize provider market power become stark. United is conservative. They're building a care delivery network that can support their existing insurance operations by serving as a price ceiling and support independent physicians as an alternative to merging with emerging provider systems. It's physician heavy - nowhere in the vision are patients given a new role in deciding where they will seek care (apart from the existing suite of benefit design tools United already deploys) and the role of the PCP remains the same.  

Aetna/CVS is trying something much more radical - putting the member at the center of the healthcare ecosystem for the first time. There are no physicians in its retail clinics. They clearly believe that consumers, with some informational and capital backing, will be able to be steered independently to high-value referral networks. In that sense, they are making a bet on the changing behavior of the modern health consumer to find solutions to a healthcare system that is not responsive to them. Primary care shortages, long-wait-times, the lack of high-quality, digitally enabled services, and any semblance of seamless communiaction amongst the different players in the industry. These are all problems that have been around a long while, but haven't been profitable to solve at scale. CVS/Aetna is going to try. 


## Putting it All Together


Despite the stark differences in their approaches, both CVS/Aetna and United are reacting to what I see as the very same threat: **the rise of powerful, vertically integrated provider systems.** Both are desperately trying to preserve a future in which there are multiple sites of care across the spectrum that patients can pick between. Both want to avoid a situation in which providers can compete alongside them in insurance markets, leveraging their brand and natural pull with patients (and hence their employers) to extract price increases and commoditize insurers. And both want to do this by constructing national care delivery networks. But the composition of these national networks demonstrate how different they really are, and the difference in philosophy between the two companies building them.But one thing is clear. **Healthcare is changing**. Let the games begin.
