---
published: true
---

At long last, after close to a year of entry rumors and key hiring in its new "1492" group, including that of [Martin Levine from Iora Health](https://www.beckershospitalreview.com/healthcare-information-technology/amazon-adds-top-iora-health-physician-to-healthcare-team.html), Amazon has officially [annouced](https://www.businesswire.com/news/home/20180130005676/en/Amazon-Berkshire-Hathaway-JPMorgan-Chase-partner-U.S) its intentions to do..._something_ in healthcare. Officially, they say they are teaming up with Berkshire Hathaway and JP Morgan "with the aim of improving employee satisfaction and reducing costs....through an independent company that is free from profit-making incentives and constraints". Problem is - as many skeptical health-technology commentators have noted - it isn't exactly divulging details about what it intends to do, and because we have nothing to critically analyze, it's quite easy to either hail or dismiss Amazon's triumvirate based solely on one's intellectual priors. But still, the annoucement is very interesting even with only scant details available, both because we all _want_ them to succeed (who does't want lower healthcare costs?), but also because Amazon has a verifiable history of approaching new industries and finding winning strategies in them. 

But how should we begin speculating in a way that gives us even a chance at making those speculations intellectually useful? I see 2 ways forward: 
1. Analyze the strategies by Amazon has approached new industries and product-markets in the past. 
2. Understand how employers have attempted to curb their employees healthcare costs in the past.

With those two pieces of background in mind, we can attempt to at least understand what Amazon and co. is likely to try and understand whether it's likely to work or not. 

## Amazon, Primitives, and Adaptation

Let's start with Amazon. Amazon is a hard company to thematically come to terms with. At first glance their core businesses of AWS, E-commerce logistics platform, as well as now its efforts in 'smart' consumer electronics and groceries,appear eclectically put together and very different from one another.  However, two [fantastic](https://stratechery.com/2016/the-amazon-tax/) [articles](https://stratechery.com/2017/amazons-new-customer/) by Ben Thompson help shed light on three key traits that Amazon's business ventures seem to share. 

1. Amazon has a **goal** of taking a cut of all economic activity - and is willing to be flexible on both the **strategies** and **tactics** necessary to achieve their goals. For example, Amazon has not taken the same tactics to dominate the cloud computing market as it has to become a leading logistics and E-commerce platform. In fact they don't even use remotely the same business model for each. And with their acquisition of Whole Foods, they have shown that they are willing to face the reality of the economics of a new industry they enter. Instead of simply trying to replicate their competitve model for E-commerce of physical goods in their  grocery entry play, they understood thatthe nature of scale and the nature of the product being sold were radically different. With this recognition, Amazon tacked and acquired Whole Foods as a way to get its grocery operations to scale quickly. 
2. Amazon's new ventures have often started around bootstrapping a product idea that is intitially valuable **internally** to Amazon's own employees, but has the potential to be replicated at scale nationally. The story of the founding of AWS is the best example of this: fascinated by the idea of "primitves" detailed in a book called "Creation" by Steve Grand, Bezos patterned AWS as a way of creative primitive computing blocks that could be valuable internally to Amazon's own teams. The investment was worth it just on the basis of its internal value; only later, after the modularized infrastructure was used internally, was the model opened up to external customers. 
3. Amazon is relentlessly focused on **modularization** (hence the concept of 'primitives') and **scale**. Even when considering  the projects it chooses to fund internally, Amazon never simply funds projects that don't have the potential to function as independent modules and therefore are constricted in their ability to scale beyond the Amazon environment. For AWS, they took previously integrated computer hardware and modularized them into the core primitives that made up these systems (e.g. servers, memory storage, etc.), allowing them to be used on whenever necessary by both internal developer teams as well as by anyone else. For their logistics and warehousing platform, the evidence of modularization is less clear, but the platform's ability to scale to be used by anyone is not in doubt: nearly 40% of Amazon's sales are sold by 3rd Party Merchants who use Amazon's logistics platform to store and deliver their goods. Additionally, Amazon generally wants these internal products to have massive fixed costs of R&D and installation, but benefit from economies of scale (either on the supply side or the deamnd side) that form the potential for a deep moat. Simply put. Amazon builds things for initially internal use that can be built once and sold to a lot of people.





