---
published: false
---

In my last two articles (which you can read here and here), I discussed two emerging trends in the healthcare marketplace: the rise of provider-led vertical integration and its threats to the insurer business model, as well as the arrival of Amazon onto the healthcare scene.

While ostensibly two separate topics, one common theme applies to both of them: **the rise of local delivery monopolies and the strategic threat they pose to the healthcare ecosystem**. The vertical integration of what used to be primarily inpatient institutions into the full spectrum of care (which was achieved first by acquiring specialty practices, outpatient facilities, and followed by expansion into owning PCP clinics) combined with the horizontal expansion of these systems has culminated in the presence of one to two large systems dominating many local geographies and a corresponding lack of competition in those areas (E.g. The duopoly of the  UPMC and Highmark  systems in the Pittsburgh area). This previously unseen levels of provider consolidation opened up new strategic vectors that other actors in the value chain then had to deal with. One of the largest of these new competitive realities derived from an increase in provider pricing power under conditions of limited competition. Managed care products (PPOs, HMOs), which traditionally served to limit the ability of providers to arbitrarily increase prices for healthcare services, were fundamentally limited in their ability to negotiate discounts when there are no credible competing provider institutions to direct patients towards. Even in newer value based purchasing schemes such as Accountable Care Organizations (ACOs), it’s likely that oligopolistic provider institutions will compete amongst each other under risk-based payment schemes (the alternative; that insurers retain most of the actuarial risk and attempt to drive consumers towards high value sites of care relies on the assumption that those alternative sites of care exist. This assumption is not satisfied under conditions of overt duopoly in all parts of the care spectrum). And while some utilization savings are expected from these arrangements, the pricing power of provider led networks will likely prevent these arrangements from bending the cost curve - specifically in commercial populations for whom prices remain a large driver of large healthcare costs (Note that Medicare Advantage populations differ in their cost drivers and thus may benefit asymmetrically from value based care arrangements that tradeoff speciality utilization for more muscular primary care).  Combined with the negative effects of VBC arrangements on new entrants (a new entrant has to access all areas of the care delivery spectrum to compete and face regulatory barriers to entry), the upshot of these trends is clear: a healthcare system that remains locked into its existing form. If we are to believe that the existing healthcare system is both unresponsive to medical evidence and unresponsive to consumer desires, then this state of affairs paints a gloomy picture for the future of healthcare in the U.S. 

So what can be done about these local monopolies? The simple answer is to take care delivery national, thereby breaking the power of local delivery monopolies and opening care delivery up to best-in-class competition (I will pause for a moment while every healthcare CEO on planet earth laughs at my suggestion). Unfortunately, this is easier said than done. Care geographies (e.g. MSAs, HCCs) are defined locally for a reason - for the better part of a century, care delivery has been an inherently local process. How can a physician in Delaware treat me in Texas? However, lest we dismiss this suggestion out of hand, changing the operative definition of ‘at scale’ has been accomplished in the face of local oligopolies before, and in stark opposition to the difficulty of doing so, many individuals are attempting to do the same in healthcare as we speak.

I’ve already discussed one method of taking care delivery national (which I’ll call the ‘brick and mortar’ method), which UnitedHealthGroup is applying to combat local provider delivery monopolies. To recap quickly, United’s OptumHealth group (under the brand OptumCare) has spent the better part of the last 8 years acquiring physician practices (IPAs), ambulatory surgical centers (ASCs), and other outpatient assets, assembling them into a group of UHG-owned care assets that cover a good slice of the care spectrum.  In assembling these outpatient care assets in a substantial number of their core markets, United has acquired soft leverage against overt pricing pressure from local provider systems. Although it’s unlikely that the United will ever directly use its OptumCare sites to circumvent large delivery systems or to exclude patients from other insurers (that is, they are employing the classical provider horizontal business model - selling provider services to anyone and everyone who wants them), the assets exist as a way of supplementing negotiating leverage that has been lost through provider consolidation. But, while the assembly of this network is a brilliant strategic move on the part of United’s management team to preserve its low-cost position, the network explicitly does not intend to displace the monopoly power of care delivery. In fact, those of us in commercial populations (and perhaps MA) will likely bear the brunt of United’s move - providers will simply charge higher rates to other, still-captive insurers to subsidize lost United profits. United’s national network is impressive, but a fundamentally defensive move, built to preserve its existing business model. Additionally, while United made a bold bet in spending its cash to make these acquisitions, it clearly doesn’t believe the future of healthcare will change very much from its current position; there’s no new value creation for patients in United’s network. United, while believing that care is likely to seep out of inpatient assets over time, thereby increasing the strategic importance of its outpatient facilities, doesn’t go any further than that assertion. Its strategy doesn’t incorporate mobile-first patients, clinically-relevant wearables, changing consumer behaviors, or any of the trends that investors think will change the competitive dynamics of healthcare delivery. To United, healthcare is still brick and mortar.

Because United’s network is unlikely to displace or render irrelevant local care monopolies, is a defensive move, and doesn’t create new value for patients, it doesn’t provide a mental model to think about scaling care delivery. 






