

It's no secret that Silicon Valley's favorite business school professor is Clayton Christensen. 



But despite creating a permanent lexicographic standard in the vocabulary of innovation, the theory has fallen out of vogue recently. I'm a newcomer to the venture and innovation ecosystem, but even I rememeber that as I was introduced to the ecosystem, it was difficult to ignore the constant debates about whether some of the Valley's breakout companies, namely Uber and AirBnB, were actually disruptive or not.

In the face of the many critics questioning the validity of Christensens's theories, I take a different view. Fundmantally, I I belive that Christensen's Theory of Disruption is an accurate, but limited theory. That is, under the tight constraints of Christensen's own creation, the theory elegantly describes a particular process by which new entrants can beat large, well-resourced incumbents. But the theory is **not** and should not be considered a universal law describing the processes of creative destruction. By virtue of its specificity and well-boundedness (a large part of what made the original formulation of the theory so precise and therefore appealing, especially when compared to other strategic theories), the theory is afflicted with several large blind spots. It's incapable of offering a suitable explanation for a host of examples in which new entrants successfully introduced new products instead of similarly well positioned incumbents, despite these products (an their associated business models) not bearing any of the hallmarks of disruptive innovation. No shortage of critics have pointed out its flaws in this sense. For example, Ben Thompson argued that the theory of low-end disruption was less applicable in consumer markets - thus explaining Apple's continued ability to stave off 'good-enough, modular' competition in a variety of consumer electronics product categories, from the iPod to the iPhone. Not to mention that Christensen failed to advance an argument for why the iPhone was able to displace Nokia and other high-end cell-phone makers in the first place. In fact part of why I think Christensen's theory has fallen out of favor in recent years (its overuse in the technology-press nonwithstanding) is it's inability to explain many successful modern technology firms. Venture capitalist Jerry Neummann  noted that of the list of companies considered 'unicorns' in 2016, "not many actually fit Christensen’s definition. Airbnb? OK, I’ll buy that. Palantir? No. Snapchat? No. SpaceX? Maybe someday. Pinterest? No. Dropbox? Sort of. WeWork? No. Spotify? No. Etc. Generally, you could make an unambiguous argument that 5% are disruptive, and a tortured argument that another 45% are. The rest? **They’re just not disruptive**. And yet they all seem to have a so-far successful strategy." 

But my goal in this post is not simply to point out the flaws in Christensen's theory. Rather, I want to revise and extend it. I - like so many others who read _The Innovator's Dillemma_ was struck by its concise, elegant explanation for why large companies can lose, not out of stupidity, but by being well-run. It didn't make do with the platitudes that usually get thrown around to explain why smaller, innovating firms could wield an advantage when compared to incumbents, e.g. "incumbents are slow to move". It was the only book to give hope that even in the face of a competent management team, why new companies should exist. 

My goal in this post is to extend the same principles to incorporate a wider variety of situations where new entrants have demonstrated the ability to successfuly enter markets and become dominant franchises. 

## What's Wrong With Disruption Theory?

Before I can extend the theory of disruption to incorporate more types of new entry, I have to isolate exactly what I think is currently problematic about the theory.

1. The theory as currently articulated is currently limited to situations in which a new product category enters the marketplace with subpar performance by the dominant standards of the market, but with high performance along a dimension that the existing market (or the high-end of the market in the case of low-end disruption) has little need for. The trajectory of improvement of this technology, progressing up the performance curve, eventually getting 'good enough' to serve the needs of the existing market, plays an important role in ensuring that incumbents ignore the competitive threat of the new product category. Empirically however, we know that many successful new product categories successfully launched and were immediately better than existing solutions on nearly every performance metric, including those valued by the existing market (when it existed). Google Maps comes to mind as a modern example. It was better in **every way** than existing solutions from TomTom or NavTek. For an older one, consider the introduction of electric lighting as a substitute for gas lighting in the late 1800s. Electric lighting was immediately recognized for its ability to thoroughly surpass kerosene as a form of home lighting. 
2. In both the theory of 'new market disruption' and 'low-end disruption', disruptive new products begin their life serving the 'low-end' of the market, either becasue they target consumers with low willingness to pay who are overserved by existing solutions (low-end), or because they open up a new market who previously couldn't afford, access, or learn how to use prior solutions. Because these products, by-definition, target consumers who can't use existing solutions, this means that products are both 'good enough' (see point 1 above), and generally cheaper than existing solutions. However, again, empirical examples prove that disruption needs to get broader. The introduction of electricity for example, first occurred in a new market, but one on the highest end of the potential market. In fact, the first street to be connected to Edisons' first power plant? Wall St. And more generally, new product categories (especially when powered by really novel technologies), generally start expensive and get cheap over time, which means they by definition must penetrate the market from the high-end. Uber for example, started not with its UberX service for every-day invidivuals, but with its true 'high-end' black-cab service (and Christensen, for this very reason, refuses to call Uber a 'disruptor'). 
3. The theory fails to recognize that the dynamics of launching a new product category into a new market are fundamentally different from trying to attack markets well served by existing value chains. In muddling these two very distinctive types of competition, it's very difficult to parse what is meant by the term, 'incumbents'. Who are the incumbents when the market a new product category is serving is so nascent as to be practically nonexistent? Take Google's introduction of a search engine product, which despite being a late entry to the market for search engines, was still not entering a market that one could describe as "well served" by highly dominant incumbents. In this situation, there were some **direct incumbents** who made search engine products, like AltaVista and Yahoo. There were also **'adjacent' incumbents**, companies that didn't produce search engine products, but operated in different parts of the value chain (e.g. Microsoft in Browsers or AOL in online portals/web-services. Even Yahoo, becasue it wasn't a 'search engine' product per se, could be classified here). From a competitive standpoint, these incumbents are often the 'largest', especially when product categories are nascent. There were also, **indirect incumbents**, like newspapers. While these incumbents didn't operate in anywhere near the same product category, they did serve similar 'jobs to be done'. In fact, it's often these indirect incumbents that bear the competitive displacements of disruption most acutely. Now compare this situation to that of modern companies (e.g. LendingClub) trying to apply software products to change the financial or healthcare systems. The definition of 'incumbent' in this situation and the corresponding competitive 'rules of the game' both change dramatically. 
4. As Jerry Neummann so articulately stated: "Disruption is not a strategy". Even when the theory can explain certain types of new entry patterns successfull - like in the Disc Drive product category - it can only do so **retrospectively**. It can describe a process after the fact, but it's not very useful in helping entrepreneurs pick market segements to attack, find product-market fit, or build competitive advantage over competitors. Can it be made more prospectively useful? 

In a sense, each of the issues raised above are **constraints** on the problem formulation that Christensen tried to answer. In part, Christensen was able to derive such an elegant solution because he constrained the problem. As with many computational problems, constraining the parameters that can vary freely in a problem tends to help yield tractable solution. The challenge then, is to gradually relax each of these constraints without losing the most critical part of Christensen's theory: an explanation of why incumbent firms (should they exist), will be **structurally** unable to respond to the innovating new entrant, irrespective of the resources and/or managerial excelllence marshalled by the incumbent. Without such an explanation, the theory has broken what made Christensen's theory so attractive in the first place - hope for startups. 


### Rebuiling Disruption

In relaxing many of the constraints (particularly #1 and #2 above), my ability to generate a tractable solution that meets the high-standards of Christensen's original theory will definitely be compromised. To solve this problem, I begin by imposing new constraints on the problem space. Specifically, I will return to the third point I made above: **the dynamics of launching a new product category into a new market are fundamentally different from trying to attack markets well served by existing value chains**. 



##



