I will start this piece by disapointing you. There is no universal theory of startup success. The fact that even at the best VC firm of all time, Sequoia Capital, a substantial fraction of investments fail, should make that truth evidently clear. So why then, am I writing a piece that details my thoughts on the drivers of startup success? Mainly, I'm doing it because I was frustrated by the vague answers I usually saw VCs parrot back whenever asked the question: "How do you evaluate a potential investment?". The answers, which all involved, some combination of product, team, and market, seemed to be just detailed enough to be _correct_ and also not detailed enough to add any value to me, someone looking to understand the VC process in more detail.

So I decided to build my own framework to answer these questions, one that would attempt to introduce some semblance of theoretical precision to the fuzzy answers I'd heard VCs give, but also be useful enough to apply to my everyday work. I drew on a host of resources to do so, including Clayton Christensen's Theory of Disruption, Michael Porter's eponymous work, David Teece's "Profiting from Innovation" paper, and a ton of case studies of new companies, going all the way back to James Watt's first firm (a full reference list will be include below). I hope you enjoy it. 

## Laying the Groundwork

Any good framework starts with definitions. I'll start by defining a startup.

**A startup is a new entrant attempting to sell a new product category in a particular market with the goal of maximizing its value.**

That's a mouthful. So let's break it down. 

First, let's deifne "new entrant". A startup in my framework does _not_ have to be a newly formed company. It merely has to be a company that did not sell a particular product prior to a particular market at a point in time, and now does. Apple for example, was a startup many times in its corporate life, first as a 'conventional' startup in the 1970s and early 1980s selling personal computers. Secondly, in the early 2000s through its entry into the mobile music market, and thirdly in the mid-to-late 2000s by entering the market for mobile communications and information devices. 

Secondly, let's define "new product category". If we bound the set of companies we are considering using 'new entrants', we will encompass a ton of companies that people wouldn't really recognize as 'startups'. For example, most small-to-medium size businesses would be included under that definition. As would large companies attempting to enter international markets with already successful domestic products. I'm frankly not very interested in those cases. Rather, I wanted to focus on businesses who have leveraged some exogenous change - usually technological - to offer a new product category that wasn't possible before. This product category is defined really broadly in my mind. It could be a physical technology, an algorithm, a business model, a sales technique, anything that promises to be a different way of solving a problem. 

Thirdly, let's define "a particular market". One of my _biggest_ confusions as a newcomer to the venture business was the loose use of the word 'market' without definition. In fact, it annoyed me so much, that I wrote an article about it. If you read that article, you'll remember that I like to define markets not in terms of the dollars spent on a particular product category (e.g. the 'smartphone' market) but by the  dollars spent on the problem, need,or want that a certain set of products meets (e.g. the dollars spent on urban transportation). That I define a market as follows: a set of actual and potential customers who have  a problem, need, or want they are willing to pay for. 

And lastly, let's define 'maximizing value'. I refer here to fundamental business value - the present value of all future cash flows discounted by the opportunity cost of the capital needed to generate those cash flows. The goal of a startup is to produce value for consumers yes, but in the eyes of its investors, it must at some point spin off cash.

Having defined what a startup is, I categorize startups as I've defined them into 2 types, based on the problem that they are solving. That is, I classify startups by the type of markets they are targeting. There are 2 basic types of markets, ones that exist and ones that are new.

Let's start by considering startups targeting existing markets.  That is, we're considering  companies that are targeting an **existing problem, want, or need of a set of consumers with a novel product category**. In this sense, that the market 'exists' indicates that consumers are _aware of the problem, want, or need they have_, are _meeting that want/need with whatever existing solutions they are able to access_, and  _will recognize if a new product category solves that problem more effectively_. Generally startups can either propose a product category that will fully displace existing solutions to the problem. Or startups can propose a product category that will build on top of the existing solutions to the problem. Uber is an example of the former. Its 'ridesharing' product category acted as a _complete_ substitute for existing solutions in the form of taxis. The substitution of gas lighting for electric lighting is another. A company like Instacart on the other hand, builds on top of existing grocery infrastructure. 

Alternatively, startups can target 'new markets'. There are 2 ways they can do this as well. The first involves a **startup seeling a new product that solves an truly new need or want (one that truly did not exist before) or is so revolutionary in its capabilities, that it unearths a latent need, problem, or want in individuals**. An example of the former was Cisco's multiprotocol router, which solved the problem of incompatible communication accross LANs, a new problem that didn't exist prior to the growth of LANs(often, fundamentally new problems are created out of the growth of other new products). An example of the latter is VMWare's OS Virtualization product, which was so revolutionary that it convinced CIOs to change their business practices becacuse they were made aware - by VMWare's product - of a new want. The second way a startup can target a new market involves a **startup providing a solution for those _potential_ customers who have a need or want that already exists, but who can't use an existing solution for some reason (cost, complexity, location, etc.)**. This is described very lucidly in Clayton Christensen's book _The Innovator's Solution_. 

The difference between targeting existing markets and new markets can be seen clearly by considering the concept of 'consumer spend' on a particular problem. When targeting existing markets, a startup must 'shift' spend from existing product categories to their new product category. When targeting 'new markets', a startup has to create spend by moving nonconsumption into consumption.

There are a couple of things to note about this typology. Firstly, I like this typology because, so far as I can see, it's _completely exhaustive_. Because it's defined from first principles, there _shouldn't_ be a startup that doesn't fit into one of those three categories (although I welcome attempts to break it). Secondly, the categories are _not_, nor should they be, mutually exclusive. The best product categories, the one that have been the foundation for companies worth tens of billions of dollars, eventually end up targeting at least two, sometimes all three categories of markets. From the perspective of a venture investor though, what really matters is which market category the startup can target within the timeframe of investment returns that the venture investor is considering, usually 8-12 years. It's very difficult to project when a product category can be so transformative as to fundamentally solve many problems for many target groups of custoemrs, and thus it's probably not good to count on that happening. Rather the initial one or two market categories the startup targets should support venture-scale outcomes. Thirdly, the lines between the categories can get a bit fuzzy, mainly based on what one considers to be the actual problem/need/want that is being solved. This problem - which I call the problem of abstraction - is tough to get around since capitalism is inherently a social process and thus, the definitions of problems aren't objective, but defined whimsically. And lastly, I deliberately have _not_ said anything about the quality of the market. We will discuss this aspect of venture decision-making later. Currently, I'm just laying the groundwork. 

Having categorized startups, I will now provide another catgorization, this time of competitors. In addition to imprecision about the definition of markets, the other aspect of most business frameworks that never sat well with me was their frequent use of the word 'competitor' without definition. Michael Porter's famous work pointed out over 20 years ago that, rather than simply competing with those companies marketing the same product as you, companies must handle  a host of competitive forces, from suppliers, customers, and new entrants to mention just a few. And yet, we still use the word 'competitor' without noting that not all competitors are identitical. Thus, here I attempt to rectify this problem, with the goal of providing clarity that will become important in my framework. 

I define 3 types of competitors that a startup may or may not have to face in the course of its lifetime. The first are **indirect incumbents**. These firms market products that form the existing set of solutions for a given problem, need, or want. For Uber's ridesharing product, taxi drivers (and their operating companies) were the indirect incumbent. As you can see, there is no requirement that incumbents be large, profitable corporations with a strong engineering or product development capability sets.  They _can_ be of course, but there is no requirement as such in my framework. In Porter's Five Forces F/W, considering the startup as the protagonist of analysis, the indirect incumbents be analagous to substitutes to the startups' product category; to the incumbents', the startup's product category is the substitute to their products. The second type of incumbents are **adjacent incumbents**. Adjacent incumbents define a broad set of players that make products and services that operate in adjacent industries to the startup. They are defined by having the capability set (or core competencies) that allow them to potentially create and market the product category the startup is marketing as well. For Netscape, one adjacent incumbent was Microsoft. Microsoft's core product, Windows and Office, did not solve the same problem that browsers did, but Microsoft operated in an adjacent market. These incumbents, while not always dominant and profitable (they might be struggling to survive and thus forced into the startups market), often are. And because they  are usually marked by similar capability sets as the startup, they are extremely dangerous opponents - even if they are not operating in your market now, they pose a legitimate threat of entry. For example, when people speak of Google, Facebook, Amazon, etc., as competitors, most of the time they are referring to their capabilities as adjacent incumbents. Young startups are probably not competing against Google's Search Product directly or indirectly (as substitutes to it), but Google could, if it decided to, build the product category the startup is also building, using more technical and monetary resources.  Additionally, note that an adjacent incumbent can also be an indirect incumbent and vice versa. Now, indirect and adjacent incumbents share one similarity - at the begginning of a startups' life, they usually aren't competing with the startup directly, that is, by marketing the same product category. As soon as they do this, they become a **direct competitor**, a company (often startups) that competes in the same market as a startup using the same type of product category. 


## The Universal Theory of Startup Success


To me, the success of a startup comes down to 4 fundamental goals that they must successfully accomplish. 

1. **Find Product-Market Fit**. Does the startup have a product category (business model, new product) that creates enough value by solving a problem such that people are willing to pay for it? 
2. **Forestall Adjacent and Indirect Competition**. Is there a reason - market-driven, technical or other - that adjacent and indirect incumbents are not currently adopting the new product category?
3. **Displace Existing Solutions**. If a startup is operating in an existing market, can the startup's product category displace/substitute-for the existing solutions to the problem, need, or want in question? 
4. **Build Competitive Advantage**. Assuming the first three questions are answered affirmatively, can the startup find a defensible position in the market that will allow it to capture cash flows that produce a return on invested capial in excess of the opportunity cost of capital and the returns of direct competitors?

What we're building to - the eventual grand conclusion - is this:  if the startup is able to do these 4 things, and presuming that the size of the market is eventually large (it may be large at the outset if the market exists, or could be small now but growing fast, if the market is new), a startup will become a large, durable company, and thus probably be a good investment for the venture investor lucky enough to invest in it. 


Note: Market Size = # of Potential Customers * Average Willingness to Pay

### Value Creation 

You're evaluating a new startup. They have, or are trying to develop, a product. Before they can show that people are willing to hand the company money for that product, the team you're considering backing doesn't have a business. It's that simple.

To to understand whether people will hand the company money, the investor first must understand what problem the product is solving. As we discussed earlier there are three answers to this question for each problem, need, or want, the startup can solve. There will likely be more than one (and, if _Crossing the Chasm_ is to believed, sometimes even up to 20). But let's zoom in on a single problem, need, or want that the new product category solves. 

If the problem, need, or want the startup is addressing is fundamentally new, or the startup is deliberately targeting a group of individuals who caannot access existing solutions, then there are, by definition, no existing solutions for the startup's product category to compete against! This is great, because it means the first challenge of a startup can be simple - build something that solves the problem people have. You don't have to compete against the indirect incumbents and their existing products. 

In this case, the difficulty of this seemingly simple edict - build something that solves the problem people have - derives from uncertainty surrounding several key questions. 

Firstly, what _is_ the problem that customers have? After all, it's _new_, and hence customers probably won't know immediately that they even have this problem. That's a risk you take when you go after a nascent problem space.  This is particularly true for companies commercializing product categories that are so revolutionary as to unearth latent needs/wants/problems. Take Snapchat for example. In retrospect it was clear that the problem Snapchat's product 'unearthed' in people was a desire for authentic communication. But it was not clear that was something people wanted prior to the product being launched. Answering this question is much easier if you're simply targeting potential customers who can't access existing solutions. 

Secondly, how many people are going to have this problem? Remember, this is a _new market_, and so it only exists in its earliest stages, and thus it's very hard to size. It's small now, by definition, but it could be massive later - or not. Even if you're targeting a problem that people are aware of, but targeting the potential customers who can't access existing solutions, it's very difficult to project how many 'potential' customers would use existing solutions if they could. 

Thirdly, what is the consumers' willingness and ability to pay? In existing markets, one can clearly focus on the magnitude of the pain point that is being solved by the new product category as a proxy for their willingness to pay. You can focus on the structure of the buyers to see whether they have the ability to pay. The answers to these questions are less clear when the problem is new or you're selling to customers who have no prior history of being able to use solutions for their problem. 

Together, these three questions can be bundled under the term, " new market risk". The reward these startups get for taking a risk on a market that is nascent, or even nonexistent, is that there is little to no competition from indirect incumbents. And, because of the market risk, there will likely be little interest from adjacent incumbents and very weak competition from direct entrants. I can't stress how important this ability to develop free from competition is. 

But not all companies can address fundamentally new problems, or be so lucky as to have a product that is so radical as to unearth a new need/want. . Some of the largest areas of needs and wants, and hence markets, (think transportation, agriculture, medicine, etc.) already exist and as a result, are served by the solutions of indirect incumbents. In fact some of the most important companies ever - notably General Electric, and even Fairchild Semiconductor - got started doing exactly this. The presence of the existing solutions of indirect incumbents adds an extra layer of complexity to the question of building something that people want. Specifically, the previous edict becomes, "Build something that people want much more relative to existing solutions". That extra addendum refers to the idea of **displacement**. When solving problems, needs, or wants that are already served by indirect incumbents, a startup's new product category must not simply be something that someone might use. Rather, to capture a meaningful amount of the consumer spend on a problem (and thus get a lot of cash flow), the product has to _completely displace_ the existing product category somehow. So, how can we reason about whether a new product category will be able to displace existing solutions?

### A Theory of Displacement Competition

This idea of displacement is crucially important for startups who are operating in existing markets. I came to think about this question mainly because my investing focus is deep-technology and biotechnology, two areas where the problems/needs are often well defined, and there are many indirect incumbents to grapple with. 

Displacement/Entry risk to me answers the question: "Can this company make something that a lot of people will buy, even if that requires a large shift in spend away from existing products?". It is about whether a startup can establish product/market fit so strong that the startup will drag spend away from incumbent product categories so rapidly that it will experience a 'tornado' of demand (which should also happen for startups targeting new markets, I should note).

Note that this is less a question about the specific startup relative to its direct competitors (competitors making the same product category) and more about the _product category_ the startup is pioneering relative to the existing product category. I call this **"displacement/substitute competition"** to distinguish it from **direct competition** between firms And therein lies the problem. There is a whole host of strategy literature that describes how individual firms can generate competitive advantage relative to other direct competitors. There is much less literature describing the conditions under which displacement is possible.

Fortunately, some of the same fundamental tools we can use to reason about firm competitive advantage can be modified to describe displacement/substitute competition, namely the fundamental drivers of cash flow:  price, value (to customer), and costs.  I define 4 factors that can control the liklihood that a new product category can displace an old one:

1. Price/Performance Trajectories.
2. Switching Costs.
3. Product Category Networking Effects.
4. Brands

The first and most important aspect in determining whether a new product category can displace an existing one for a problem, want or need is the relative price and performance trajectories of the new category relative to the old one. A new product category can begin as more expensive or cheaper than the existing product category, and can underperform or outperform on a set of performance metrics that are relevant for solving the problem or meeting the need in question. For any given problem, there isn't only one performance metric that a consumer uses to judge overall performance, and as Ben Thompson has astutely pointed out many times, the performance metric doesn't have to be quantifiable either. Just as relevant as the price/performance comparison of course is the _trajectory of improvement_ for each of these dimensions, which can change the competitive dynamics of substitute competition drastically. For example, home incandescent electric lighting started out by outperforming gas lighting on a host of dimensions - quality of light (brightness), a lack of noxious gases, etc. - but it also was very expensive. As the technology matured (from DC plants to AC plants with transformers and inverters) howevered, the technology was able to become much cheaper, displacing gas lighting entirely. 

A good rule of thumb that VCs always throw out with regard to this is that a new product category should be "10X" better/faster/cheaper. However, I'm not sure this is a good rule of thumb. At what level of 'better/faster/cheaper' does a new product category It's still an open question in my mind, and I'm quite sure 

The second factor to consider is switching costs. This is a _vitally important_ factor to consider. Most VCs and founders are very familiar with the idea of switchng costs with respect to direct competition. The idea is the same here, except that the number of ways a product category can create switching costs exceeds the number of ways 


### Indirect Incumbent Reactions

Unfortunately for a startups, capitalism is dynamic. Thus, incumbents will eventually be given the chance to respond to a startup introducing a new product categories. What are the ways in which they can do this? Note that my answer to this will regard _only_ the incumbents existing solutions for a specific problem - their existing market. 

I think a 2x2 matrix helps think about the potential outcomes. On the first axis is 'degree of displacement': high or low. On the second axis is the 'incumbent response': exit existing product category or maintain position in  existing product category (which can either come by completely ignoring the new product category or by responding to the new product category via improvements in the their existing products).

If the startup's new product has low displacement, there won't be a tornado of demand shifting from the existing product category to the new one, and so it's highly unlikely that an indirect incumbent will exit the existing product category. It _is_ possible that, should the startups' new product category also grow in a new market (remember that more than one is possible), that the indirect incumbent - if they also are adjacent incumbents and thus have the capabilities to develop or acquire the new product category - could enter the new market to compete with the startup 'on its home turf'. If this does occur, the question of what barriers to entry the startup has been able to erect becomes relevant, a question for the 'value capture' section of the piece. But without the existential threat of their existing product categories becoming obsolete relative to the startups' new product, the incumbents will not exit the presumably cash flow positive existing product category. Thus, if the startup has low displacement, the most likely outcome is simply that the incumbent maintains its position, maybe at best improving the product slightly to ward off any potential price/performance trajectory improvements in the startups' product category.

If however, the startup's new product has successfully started to shift spend, then the incumbent is faced with a choice. It can exit the the product category, choosing to do something else altogether or compete _directly_ with the startup (note that if they choose to do this, the indirect incumbent becomes a direct competitor). Additionally, it could decide to try and ignore or fight the displacement, maintaining its position in the existing product category. Despite how irrational the later seems, one _can_ see this happen in the historical record, as theories like Clayton Christensen's Disruption Theory demonstrate to us.

Of course, none of this actually tells you _why_ an incumbent would take any of these choices. I have given this some thought. But unfortunately, this piece 






This is where I think Christensen's Theory of Disruptive Innovation presents a helpful, if incomplete, guide. Christensens's theory describes one way new product categories can displace old ones. He notes that when a new solution to a problems arrives, it's can be cheaper, worse than the existing product category along one set of performance dimensions, but much better along alternative performance dimensions. This set of characteristics allows the new product category to access a set of potential customers. Initially, it can get at these potential customers because serving them would violate the economics of the existing product category - they are outside the purview of indirect incumbents. Then as the performance trajectory of the new product category improves, it can ultimately 'suck' customers out of the old product category into the new one, leaving the old indirect incumbents out to dry. 

Now note that I'm cheating a bit here. I previously defined the act of "targeting potential customers who were unable to access an existing solution set but would like to", as creating a new market in my last article. So technically Christensen's Theory is an example of a company targeting a _new market_, which doesn't answer the question I posed. The princples however, are what matter here. As I mentioned at the end of the last piece, truly great product categories do a bit of all 3 catetgories of market entry or creation - they just do it in different orders.  Smartphones provide an example of where a new product category (smartphones, led by the iPhone) started by immediately displacing a whole _host_ of existing solutions (not just existing mobile phones) for existing needs/wants for an existing market, but ended up converting potential customers to actual customers as the product category got cheaper. Christensen's Theory is simply meant to demonstrate that product cateogry displacement and resulting spend shift _is_ possible.

So how should VCs think about whether a new product category is likely to displace existing solutions? Well first, as Christensen's lesson shows, if you can start out selling into a set of potential customers, who for some reason, are unable to access existing solutions (not necessarily because they're too expensive - for any reason really) - do it, because it will give the startup time to grow without having to shift spend much. But if not, the rule of thumb VCs like to say, is make sure your product category is 10x better or cheaper than existing solutions - or can get there. 10x might be an arbitrary number, but the point isn't the number so much as the idea that when you have to directly take on indirect incumbents, you better bring a new product category to the table so much better than existing solutions that it can overcome the barriers keeping the existing product category entrenched.

Unfortunately, no good treatment exists to discuss what these barriers are, and to provide any more depth than the "10X Better or Cheaper" rule. A lot of energy has gone into defining the barriers to entry within a given product-market, economies of scale, networking effects, cornered resources, brand, learning economies, etc. However, these sources of competitive advantage don't always apply when considering a battle between two product categories. I'm going to try though. 

The last question that I would want answers to regarding a startups' ability to enter a market is as follows: "Why aren't indiret or adjaent incumbents launching this product category as we speak?" 

### Competitive Advantage

So now you have a product that a lot of people want to buy. You've displaced the existing solutions if there are any, and you're in the classic 'tornado' of demand.. Just keep the foot on the gas until you're Google right? Unforunately, no. The good thing is that generally, the tornado of demand, especially if the market is large, brings tons of revenue to a startup. The bad thing is that to ensure that this revenue 59 



### The Elephant in the Room: Market Size

