
When most VCs get asked the question: "How do you evaluate investment opportunities?" (or some variation of that question), most have a fairly generic response. Make sure you're in a fast-growing (and eventually, really big) market. Solve a real pain point for your customers ('Vitamins not aspirin'). Have a dynamite team tailored for the job at hand. Make sure the product can be good enough to find product-market fit, if not the be best possible product in the category.  Think about whether the business is defensibile (and therefore can generate good, sometimes great, margins). Etc. Etc. There are often other things discussed too, but you get the point. It's a simple answer, and a correct one.

The answer is just generic enough to be both _right_ - these factors in a company are **very** important and thus universally considered by every investor - and not detailed enough to satiate me or provide any sort of unique insight. The answer also falls in line with what people want to believe about venture - that it's _simple_ but _difficult_. The idea that you should look at the market, team, product, and  defensibility is a very _simple_ framework for investing, but one that's probably devilishly difficult to perform in practice. And I agree with that sentiment about the nature of the venture business. But still, the answer has never satisfied me. It's always seemed like the "Venture Captial 101" answer, designed to be right and not mislead students, but also designed to hide nuances that professionals have internalized. As someone who wants to build a career in this industry, it therefore seemed obvious to me that I should try and go find the "Venture Capital 200" answer and really explore the nuances.

I didn't find one good framework that gave me all the answers - nor should I have expected too. If there was just one 'right' framework with which to analyze technology investing, everyone would build their investment strategies around it and by definition, there would be no outsized returns. However, what I did find was that by reading broadly about the history of technology-driven businesses (beyond just the ICT revolution and back all the way to the 1800s), as well as analyzing literature from corporate finance, corporate strategy, business school professors, and economists, I came accross 5-6 core mental models that I could reliably  refer to and modify when I was trying to explain or analyze a startup success or failure. So I thought I would write about those core frameworks and explain some of the modifications I made to them to make them more useful to me.  


## Framework 1: The Basics of Competitive Advantage

Microeconomic theory states that competition drives a company's return on invested capital to the opportunity cost of capital. Thus, companies that create a return on invested capital in excess of the opportunity cost of capital by definition have some unique attributes that allow them to keep competitors at bay. The best companies, venture-backed or not, create a ROIC _far_ in excess of the opportunity cost of capital. That's why they made so much money for investors. Thus, in so far as venture captilists are interested in backing companies that have a high return for shareholders, it behooves them to understand the principles of competitive advantage. 

Sustainablve competitive advantage is actually a subset of sustainable value creation. A company creates value for its shareholders if it produces cash flows that yield a return in excess of the opportunity cost of capital (OCC). The test is purely quantitative. Moving one layer deeper, it has a competitive advantage if at any point in time it can create a return on invested capital (ROIC) greater than that of its competitors. The two concepts are related, but not identical. Additionally, the test of value creation and/or competitive advantage is not explanatory - it doesn't explain why a company is able to uniquely genrate a ROIC above the OCC. And because VCs  invest while companies and the markets they serve have not yet reached any semblance of steady state, these quantitative tests of value creation and competitive advantage can be very misleading. Thus, it's also important to understand what factors are responsible for creating competitive advantage as described above.

Before we do this though, I want to quickly note one important factor. Questions of competitive advantage only become relevant to investors after questions about product-market fit are answered. Part of why venture capitalists, particularly early-stage VCs, focus on product-market fit more so than antyhing else is that when startups first launch, not only have they not created a competitive advantage, they haven't even proved that they can create value for customers by bringing to market a product or service that people want to buy. Ultimately, the amount of value that a company can create for shareholders is a subset of the value they create for consumers. Only after the company has built something individuals want, thus creating value, can the value created be split amongst the consumer, company, and other participants in the value chain. When investors think about competitive advantage they are thinking about the latter question - value capture - not about value creation, which should be the first and foremost question for startups to answer.

Competitive advantage can expresses itself in three parts: benefit, barrier, and time. At first, we will only a consider competitive advantage at a single point in time. We will return to discuss time in a bit. 

Benefit (to the firm in question, _not_ to the customer) describes how a company earns the excess cash flows necessary to produce a high ROIC for shareholders. Thinking about the quantitative levers a business has to achieve excess cash flow simplifies the analysis a lot. Certis paribus, a firm can generate the excess cash flows associated with competitive advantage in 4 main ways:
1. It can charge a higher price without seeing an erosion of market share.
2. It can achieve a lower cost structure - using less fixed costs, lowering its customer acquisition costs, and/or improving the gross margin of its products, thus making its products cheaper without sacrificing quality attributes. 
3. It can maintain a higher long-term market share without commensurate reductions in price.
4. It can reinvest in new projects at a larger rate without sacrificing ROIC. This lever for cash flow  augmentation doesn't get talked about as much as the other three levers, but it allows for differential increases in cash flow by finding opportunities for high-ROIC investments that others cannot. 

Each of these four factors can be gleaned by thinking about ways a company can produce more cash flow than its competitors.

However, the governing characteristic of competition is arbitrage. Whatever allows a company to generate one of those 4 barriers will be copied very quickly by competitors drawn to the augmented cash flows. Thus the second component to compettive advantage - barriers, are important too.



## Framework 2: Andy Grove and Strategic Dynamics

Porter's Forces, and all the work that has stemmed from it, provides a great way of analyzing a business at a particular time. In economic parlance it's a great model of competitive statics. Unforuntately, it's not well suited to analyze change. And as venture practitioners, change is what we're interested in. **How is competitive advantage gained by new entrants and lost by incumbents?** **What conditions make gaining and losing competitive advantage possible?** These are the questions upon which a successful  To answer these questions, we turn to one of Silicon Valley's most important operators - Andy Grove. It turns out, in addition to largely inventing the management style of the Valley, using that to build one of the defining companies in technology history, and writing about it, Andy Grove was also a teacher! He and Robert Burgelman (author of _Strategy is Destiny_) co-taught a class at the Stanford GSB in which they attempted to provide a framework to answer those very questions. They also wrote about in a book called _Strategic Dynamics_ which I recommend for anyone interested in a cool look at a manager and strategists outlook on technology themes in the 1980s and 1990s. Because of that I call this framework the Strategic Dynamics framework.

Grove defines strategy as a company's method for creating profitable growth in its environment. Using that definition, Grove defines the entire set of variables a company needs to conisder as a set of three elements: **P**, **E** and **e**. **P** is the company of interest while **E** represents it's environment. **P** then can be seen as a vector consisting of the variables an individual company can internally control, while **E** is a vector consisting of market and non-market forces that shape the environment the company operates in. Which ones? The exact same forces Porter (and others) identified above. **E** consists of the traditional five market forces forces - suppliers, customers, substitutes, direct competitors, and new entrants - as well as complementors, distribution channels, and two non-market forces, technology and governemental regulation. So far, it seems that this framework is just the same framework we defined above with some added structure. Not so. Grove also defined a third element of the set: **e**. which represents other industries or emerging segments that have the potentially to affect **E** and thus **P** at some time in the future. e can represent emerging technologies, emerging substitutes, emerging complements, emerging customers (e.g. a new market), etc. That is, it consists of a vector with the _same_ representative elements as **E**, but in a different context, either from another industry or something new altogether. Together, **(E,e)** represent the entire environment a company must consider when strategizing.

Grove realized that normally, the interactions between any element in **(E,e)** are in steady-state, which can be desribed like this.

Firstly, the current relationship between P and each element in E can be either one of indifference, subordination, or interdependence or dominance, depending P's control over and dependence on E (e.g. high control, low dependence leads to a sitaution of strategic dominance). See Figure 1 for a full typology. At any point in time, the sum of these relationships determines whether a firm has competitive advantage. Note that this statement is not explanatory, merely observational in nature - this tells me nothing about why P is strategically subordinate or dominant, just that it is. If, at this point in time, we're interested in knowing why the firm has a competitive advantage, we need to return to Framework #1. 

Secondly, while change in these relationships - and thus the competitive situation - is constant, the type of change and the effects of that change can be radically different. Some change is **limited and stable**. In this situation of limited change, both actors in the (E,e) as well as P engage in what are known as rule abiding actions, which Grove defines as, "actions that are consistent with the prevalent power relationships among the industry players and with the industry recipe for success". These rules, which can be **normative** (based on law, culture, ethics, administrative principles), **technological** (based on the available technology), **economic** (representing the existing balance of economic power), or **cognitive** (involving widely shared knowledge about success factors), are the embodiment of statics. When limited change occurs, the relationships between elements in (E,e) and P don't change (i.e. subordinate firms remain subordinate, dominant firms remain dominant) and thus competitive advantage, when it exists, isn't born or lost. Some change can occur of course, but it doesn't meaningfully change the distribution of potential industry earnings (PIE), nor can it create or destroy entire industries. Think of recent interactions between Boeing and Airbus, two aerospace manufacturerers. Airbus made a strategic error in comitting resources to the A380 product, which incorrectly identified larger planes as a desire of the customer base (largely because Boeing's faux committments to upgrading the 747-800). The A380 flopped on launch, and Airbus will never recoup the investment it made in developing the product, but the aerospace industry has not materially changed in structure. The manufacturing segment is still characterized by a duopoly. Manufacturers hold more power than airline operators. The basis of Boeing and Airbus' competitive advantage hasn't changed. Boeing just gained a bit at the expense of Airbus.  

More radical types of change - the type of change that we're interested in as venture capitalists - occurs when 10X change in elements of P or E,e (remember, the elements inlcude technology, government regulation, customers, suppliers, etc.) allows for rule-breaking actions to be taken, either by actors in the environment (P-independent change) or by  P-itself (P-controlled change), or by both (Runaway change - more common than you might think!). These actions then materially affect the distribution of potential industry earnings (PIE), either by creating an industry, altering one, or destroying one. Lastly, Grove also noticed that such change - change that allows for rule-breaking actions to be engaged in - rarely derives from E-P interactions, but rather from autonomous initiatives taken by players in e. Most opportunities presented by e are small and/or not viable - but at times e can grow rapidly to complement or substitute E. Additionally and just as important, the small size of e offers the opportunity for players (either P, or others in E) to explore opportunities for rule-breaking action _outside_ the purview of the existing steady state environment. 

This framework provides a powerful set of guidelines for the ways change can occur, industries can be created, altered by new entrants, or even destroyed, as follows:

1. P is the company of interest. E = (Customers, Direct Competitors, Suppliers, Substitutes, Complementors, New Entrants, Technology, Government Regulation, Channels). e is a carbon copy of E except each entry in e represents the same force in adjacent industries or emerging segments. 
2. At any point in time, P either has or does not have a competitive advantage. To test whether a firm does, you must consider two questions. Does the firm have materially higher cash flows than competitors (Benefit)? And are there reasons why only they have acess to that higher cash flow (Barriers)? Benefit is defined by a company's ability (all else equal) to charge higher prices, maintain higher market share, obtain a lower cost structure (higher gross margin, lower acquisition costs, etc.), or invest at a faster rate than it's direct competitors. If a firm can do this, it likely has competitive advantage. Barriers are reasons **why** others cannot achieve those benefits. 
3. This competitive advantage - if it exists - is expressed in the relationships (subordinate, interdependent,cominant, indifferent) between P and each element of (E,e) and in the rules of the interactions (technological, normative, cultural, economics) that elements in E abide by. Linear change is rule abiding and doesn't change relationships in way to materially change PIE or create/destroy industries.
4. However, 10X changes in the elements of (E, e) (Most often, e, e.g. exploring an emerging technology that can create a new product) can allow for rule-breaking actions to be taken, and thus materially alter the relationships between P and (E,e). Thus, competitive advantages can be gained and lost due to 10x changes in elements of e. 
5. The importance of e as a shield from existing competitive situation of E has to be noted. Here's why. What allows for e to engage in rule-breaking actions is a 10X change in some environmental element. But what prevents actors in E (especially incumbent companies) from attempting to enter _e_ is uncertainty stemming from its **size** or **viability**. Let's consider a thought experiment. A new entrant, _N_ approaches an existing environment E, in which competitive advantage is held by a set of firms P<sub>1</sub>, and PP<sub>2</sub>. _N_ has used a 10X change in technology (an member of _e<sub>1</sub>_)to create a product with better performance and cheaper cost structure. It decides to market this product to the existing customer set in E. Because _N_ is launching the product with obviously defined benefits to the customer segement in E, the signal to P<sub>1</sub> and PP<sub>2</sub> that this change will negatively affect their slice of the PIE is strong.  Unless there is a strong reason why the existing incumbents cannot replicate and market the product, they will do so because the signal is so clear.  However,  by exploring say, an emerging market segment, _e<sub>2</sub>_, whose needs can only be met by the new product, P<sub>1</sub> and PP<sub>2</sub> will be hesistant to enter the technology seriously perhaps because they doubt the size of _e<sub>2</sub>_ will be large - markets that don't exist can't be analyzed! Additionally, they could doubt the technical viability of the product in _e<sub>1</sub>_, which could prevent them from entry. In both cases, _e_ is valuable to new entrants beacuse of its _uncertainty_. 10X changes can occur with little uncertainty, and may change PIE and industry structure, but not necessarily in a way that's _detrimental_ to P. 
6. The other thing I wanted to note is that often, an _e_ (or likely, a set of them) can emerge without reference to another _E_. That is, whole new industries can truly be born. Consider the market for internet search

Note: The use of '10x' is a convention I have taken from Grove and highly depends on the context of the change - some changes that can allow for rule-breaking actions to be taken may not necessarily be a quantitative 10x in magnitude. E.g. it's impossible to say whether a technological change like the Closed Body in automotive manufacturing increased the value of the product by 10x to customers, but it did enough to allow new entrants like Chrysler and GM, which did not have competitive advantage, to gain it!

Grove has a great name for points at which, due to 10X changes in market and non-market forces, often derving from e, put tremendous strain upon a companies relationship between the environment. They're called a **strategic inflection point**. The takeaway for venture capitalists, to me, is pretty clear. You should be investing in companies that present 
 

## Framework 3: Silicon Valley's Favorite Professor Returns - Disruptive Innovation (Heavily Modifed)

Ah, good old disruption. Ever since the theory was published it's been a lightning rod for criticism and praise. Supporters of the theory point out that in a world where most frameworks for innovation are based in anecdotes, Christensen's is backed by real research. VCs like Marc Andreesen also point out that only Christensen's theories explain several key facets of technological innovation that they routinely see in practice: Christensen's theory both explains why well-managed firms, not a result of idiocy or stupidity, but of their pursuit of profits, can miss emerging product-market opportunities that they had the capability to capitalize on, as well as why new innovations are so often dismissed as 'toys', yet due to rapidly increasing performance trajectories, can soon take on huge importance as the flagship products of impressive firms. Detractors point out that while the theory may be accurate in so far as its defined, it cannot offer a totalizing picture of technology-based new entrants. Many new entrants did not commercialize 'good-enough' product categories appealing to new, unserved markets or existing, low-margin customers via ancillary benefits outside the main performance metric. Uber, Google, SpaceX, even General Electric back in the day, were each successful new entrants that - almost irrespective of one considers the 'incumbent' in question - successfully introduced products that were not less complex, cheaper, good-enough products, but more expensive and immediately orders of magnitude higher performance than the product categories they replaced. Ben Thompson, a noted that Christensen's theory of low-end disruption might not apply nearly as well in consumer markets, as Christensens' prediction of Apple's doom has been proved wrong accross three separate product introductions (iPod, iPhone, iPad) spanning two distinct industries. Additionally, as venture-philosopher Jerry Neumann points out, disruption, despite all its academic backing, is not a prescriptive theory - it doesn't tell entrepreneurs _how_ to build a great business moving forward. 

I've always been vexed by the theory too. 

On the one hand, its supporters have a really good point. New products are often not taken seriously when it's first introduced, only to later become lynchpins of our modern way of life, bringing with them new dominant firms. Leading firms can, if not go bankrupt, certainly 'fade' from relevance, even when well run, and also miss new emerging market opportunities even with the capabilities to enter. And Christensen's theory of new market disruption (as opposed to low-end disruption) makes a really clear point that is seen all the time, which is that new products often are launched in new market niches outside a current customer base, and then, over time, 'suck' the customer base out of the old product-market and into the new one, leading to the collapse of the old product-market. That process of new-category creation followed by hollowing out of the old-category can be seen so often in the history of technology (dating back to like 1830...) that it's almost eerie. 

But on the other hand, the critiques are damning too. Specifically, Christensen's focus on new companies entering markets with 'good-enough' products that underperform existing products on traditional metrics, but are cheaper and outperform on an ancillary metric, does **not** explain all innovation. It certainly cannot explain biotechnology new entrants, the field where I work in and in which new entrants have a deep history of success (e.g. Genentech, Amgen, many other nameless but successful exits that have improved the standard of care and made money for VCs). But it also can't explain much of the modern tech movement. To quote Neumann, "But neither Square nor Uber were disruptive in The Innovator’s Dilemma sense. Neither was cheaper and less functional than what they were replacing and then remained cheaper as functionality grew. Merchants that adopted Square early on did not do so because it was cheaper than the alternative, they adopted it because they finally had a viable way to accept credit cards; for most of them it was more expensive than their previous way of doing business (cash) and more expensive than what the incumbents would have provided, if the incumbents had provided them anything. The key difference between what Square did and disruption is that Square did not open a new market by bringing the cost down into the reach of an entirely new set of customers, they served a small set of customers that the incumbents simply didn’t care about because it was a small market. This is not disruption, it’s classic market segmentation.Nor did people adopt Uber because it was cheaper. Neither set of customers–the riders or the drivers–saved money from using Uber. Riders use Uber because it’s easier to hail a taxi that way, not comparative cost. Drivers use Uber because it’s more attractive than driving a taxi, not comparative pay. Both of these are an indirect result of taxi regulation. Again, this is not disruption. The new market was available because Uber first ignored, then lobbied to change, regulations that made that market seemingly unavailable to new entrant." Going back further, Neumann notes, "Intel, after all, did not enter the microprocessor market by intentionally introducing a cheaper general purpose computer, they entered it by introducing a much more expensive slide rule…the 4004 was developed to power electronic calculators. The market for electronic calculators was small, allowing Intel the room to build expertise in CPUs, but Intel’s entry can’t be described by Christensen’s attack from below process unless you take into account facts not then in evidence: that CPUs would be used to build general purpose computers". I'll stop here because you get the point.

Additionally, the theory, for all its specifications, is really vague when it comes to identifying and denoting different types of competitors and incumbents. Who did Google and its search engine product disrupt? Microsoft, because they missed search and instead won the browser market, which was difficult to monetize? Or newpsapers and libraries, which was the way we 'got the job done' with respect of information search before Google? What about Western Union, which commercialized the telegraph in the 1830s? 

That being said, the reason I don't want to 

https://dspace.mit.edu/bitstream/handle/1721.1/8883/48845761-MIT.pdf?sequence=2

### Better Defining Competitors 

### Utterback and Abernathy's Dominant Design

### Updating the Failure Framework


## Framework 4: Who Profits from Innovation?

## Framework 5: The Economic Logic of General Purpose Technologies 

## Putting it all together





