---
published: true
---


If I was forced to use one word to describe the the healthcare industry at end of 2017, I'd call the industry **merged**.

The sheer number and scale of M&A transactions in 2017 was staggering. We saw hospital large national hospital systems like Aurora  and Advocate Healthcare combine to create a cross-state system arguably worth $10.7 Billion; industry giants like UnitedHealthGroup expanded through the acquisition of DaVita Medical Group's outpatient dialysis clinics; and most famously,  CVS and Aetna decided to merge in a $69 Billion move that created perhaps the first large-scale combination of an insurer and pharmacy chain. While many will worringly focus on the horizontal mergers and the ongoing formation of large, dominant regional hospital systems and their effect on healthcare prices, I think the more interesting strategic phenomenon derives from the  deals involving the two insurers: Aetna and United. 

Both United, through its Optum care subsidiary (which bought the DaVita clinics) and Aetna, through its recent merger with CVS,  engaged in a practice that has become more common in the post-ACA healthcare landscape: a vertical merger. That is, instead of buying a competitor that operates at a similar level of the value chain - one that processes and pays out claims for healthcare services like a traditional health insurer might - they've bought companies that operate perform different services.In the case of UnitedHealthGroup - the largest healthcare company in the U.S. and the 800 LB gorilla of the healthcare market  - their purchase of DaVita's dialysis clinics was simply a continuation of a strategy they've employed very consistently for years, buying various local group practices, independent physician associations (IPAs), urgent care centers (low-cost substitutes for hospital ERs), and ambulatory surgical centers (ASCs) to handle lower-acuity oupatient procedures. For CVS and Aetna however, the merger was far from business as-usual. Most individuals probably know CVS as a pharmacy chain and convinience store. Given the fact that there's an [82% chance you live within 10-minutes of a CVS location](https://qz.com/1146577/cvs-and-aetna-aet-82-of-americans-are-within-10-miles-of-the-pharmacy/), you likely have visited the chain at least once to get a prescription filled. However, the company operates in many more lines of busines. Most importantly, it also operates CVS-Caremark, a pharmacy benefits manager (PBM) and a set of 'minute-clinics' that are located both in its own locations as well as in grocery stores like Target. Aetna on the other hand is a traditional diversified insurer, operating in a variety of segments of the health insurance market. Thus, their merger, as compared to UHG's efforts, combined different aspects of the value chain, specifically insurance, PBMs, pharmacies (and their associated distribution system, and minute clinics. 

So what does this all mean for the state of the healthcare industry? There are a couple of key points that the mergers raise regarding future of healthare: 
1. The lines between the traditional players in the healthcare value chain are blurring, leading to more vertical integration and an uncertain future.
2. Despite the similarities in the mergers, the differences emphasize that both UnitedHealth and Aetna-CVS have placed **very different bets** on what the future of the industry looks like.
3. 

## Healthcare's Great Covergence

Vertical integration in healthcare is not a new phenomenon. In fact, some the nation's most prestigious healthcare institutions such as The Cleveland Clinic, Geisinger Health Systems,Kaiser Permanente, and the Mayo Clinic, are all vertically integrated combinations of provider organizations and health insurers. Consumers in California for instance, can buy insurance plans from the Kaiser Foundation Health Plans that function as pre-paid plans for any of Kaiser's owned physician groups and hospitals. As a patient, you are locked into using Kaiser's facilities, but in return, Kaiser is theoretically able to use its integrated structure to add value to its services and (hopefully) improve its profitability . In fact, not only is vertical integration not new, but the vision of the healthcare market consisting of many competing pre-paid group practices paid on a capitated basis lines up broadly with the vision for U.S. healthcare promoted by some of the earliest health economists such as Paul Ellwood (the man who invented the HMO and is known as 'the father of managed care') and Alain Enthoven in the 1970s and 1980s. There isn't a perfect 1-1 mapping of the mechanisms, but the fact is that the platonic form of U.S. healthcare, in which small group and solo physician practices   But chances are, despite the model's prevalence in certain small pockets of the U.S., your local physicians and specialists don't practice under that model.

There are several key reasons the explain why vertically integrated models never took off in the U.S.:

Firstly, as Ben Thompson (summarizing an argument first forwarded by Clay Christensen and Michael Raynor in their book _The Innovator's Solution_) notes in his piece on [Apple and The Innovator's Dilemma](https://stratechery.com/2010/apple-innovators-dilemma/),  "in well-functioning markets[especially markets for products with various modularized subcomponents], vertical integration is suboptimal." It's only, as he notes, when "transaction costs in the vertical chain outweigh the losses due to the inefficiencies of being vertically integrated" does vertical integration make sense as an organizational form.  

Secondly, 



## United vs. Everyone Else. 