
When most VCs get asked the question: "How do you evaluate investment opportunities?" (or some variation of that question), most have a fairly generic response. Make sure you're in a fast-growing (and eventually, really big) market. Solve a real pain point for your customers ('Vitamins not aspirin'). Have a dynamite team tailored for the job at hand. Make sure the product can be good enough to find product-market fit, if not the be best possible product in the category.  Think about whether the business is defensibile (and therefore can generate good, sometimes great, margins). Etc. Etc. There are often other things discussed too, but you get the point. It's a simple answer, and a correct one.

The answer is just generic enough to be both _right_  and not detailed enough to provide any sort of unique insight. The answer also falls in line with what people want to believe about venture - that it's _simple_ but _difficult_. The idea that you should look at the market, team, product, etc., is a very _simple_ framework for investing, but one that's probably devilishly difficult to perform in practice. And  while I agree with that sentiment about the nature of the venture business,  the answer has still never satisfied me. 

To put it simply, it's always seemed like the "Venture Captial 101" answer, designed to be right and not mislead students, but also designed to hide nuances that professionals have internalized. It seemed obvious to me then that I should try and go find the "Venture Capital 200" answer and really explore the nuances.

Additionally, for a long time I've wanted to write a post on the concept of entrepreneurial strategy, the guiding princples of strategy that entrepreneurs should consider when launching businesses, which ideally should incorporate themes from competitive strategy, literature on the nature of technological innovation, as well as the prevaling wisdom about startup formation that has disseminated in the last decade. The literature base for each of these three areas is vast. There have been some famous mental models describing the nature of innovation. Christensen's Disruption Theory as well as the Utterback "Dominant Design" paradigms come to mind. There's also been a great amount of literature describing the factors that affect the competitive position of a business, and strategies businsess use to generate competitive advantage. And lastly - as stated above - much of the common tactical advice on how entrepreneurs should build companies has also been disseminated due to the explosion in the number of and interest in entrepreneurship and venture. But, the three areas have developed in separate, isolated silos, with very little attempt made (that I can tell) to weave the strands together into a coherent framework that can guide both entrepreneurs, but also provide an answer to the question of "How do you evaluate startups?" that I presented at the outset of this piece.

Thus, the goal with this blog was to ruminate on these topics and try and synthesize a mental model that both provided entrepreneurs with a guide to building a durable, lasting company as a new entrant as well as gave VCs a more detailed model to evaluate the potential of investments. 


## The Right Questions and Definitions


Any mental model has to start with a set of questions it's trying to help answer. For me, the ultimate question for entrepeneurs and VCs is this:

**What are the necesary and sufficient conditions under which new entrants can successfully enter a large market and eventually become a dominant, durable company in that market?"**

To answer that question though, we're going to have to break it down into a set of subquestions that, when put together, provide an answer.

From first principles, any successful startup has to first **enter** a market with a product and secondly **become a dominant, durable company** in that market. Ideally this market is eventually large. 

Thus, we first have to answer the question of _entry_ and then we have to answer the question of market _dominance_. Unfortunately, the definitions of entry, large-market, dominance, and durability aren't as simple as they might at first appear. 

Let's start with large markets, dominance, and durability. 

I calculatge the size of the potenital from the bottom up, as most VCs prefer. The size of a market is defined by the total number of dollars the company in question and its competitors can access in a steady state evironment (i.e. the market grows at a terminal growth rate in line with the overall economy) * . When the company starts, that number can be small, but it eventually has to be large if the company is going to generate a large amount of cash (and thus be valuable - the value of a company is the sum of its cash flows discounted into the present). The reason I include 'large' in the definition is because it doesn't matter whether a company is dominant in a small market - the low magnitude of cash flows will ensure that the value of the company is correspondingly small. Additionally, while we generally take the size of the market as an exogenous variable outside the control of entrepreneurs, it's actually not, and any mental model should include some guidelines as to how a company can grow the market they are in.

* Note: To simplify matters, I'm referring only to the total dollars available for a single business line, not for multiple business lines. We will get into the interactions between different product categories in a value chain later on though. 

I define dominance and durability together as follows. A dominant, durable company holds a _sustainable competitive advantage_ in a  given market. This definition is taken straight from the annals of strategy. Sustainablve competitive advantage is actually a subset of sustainable value creation. A company creates value for its shareholders if it produces cash flows that yield a return in excess of the opportunity cost of capital (OCC). Moving one layer deeper, it has a competitive advantage if at any point in time it can create a return on invested capital (ROIC) greater than that of its competitors. Dominance is defined by how big the gap between ROIC and the ROIC of other companies are. A competitive advantage becomes _sustainable_ when this ROIC can be maintained at a rate substantially above the OCC for a substantial amount of time, termed the Competitive Advantage Period (CAP). Thus dominance is measured by the magnitude of ROIC that a company can earn about its OCC (evaluated on a cash basis). Durability is measured by the time horizon a business can maintain that level of return. Of course, this is just a definition - it doesn't say anything about _how_ to achieve this persistent differential returns on invested capital. We'll get there when we get to the defensibility section of the model. 


- How do the necessary and sufficient conditions for startup success change when entering a wholly new market as compared to when deploying a new product into an market with existing solutions?
- Do new entrants have to enter 
- How do new entrants undermine or render the competitive advantages of existing businesses obsolete?
- What types of risks can new entrants take and succeed relative to incumbents with a similar capability set?


## Entry

The 


### What is an incumbent?


### Middle Ground

## Defensibiltiy 

## Framework 1: The Basics of Competitive Advantage

Microeconomic theory states that competition drives a company's return on invested capital to the opportunity cost of capital. Thus, companies that create a return on invested capital in excess of the opportunity cost of capital by definition have some unique attributes that allow them to keep competitors at bay. The best companies, venture-backed or not, create a ROIC _far_ in excess of the opportunity cost of capital. Their value accretion was so large and as a result they made their investors boatloads of money. Thus, in so far as venture captilists are interested in backing companies that have a high return for shareholders, it behooves them to understand the principles of competitive advantage. 

Sustainablve competitive advantage is actually a subset of sustainable value creation. A company creates value for its shareholders if it produces cash flows that yield a return in excess of the opportunity cost of capital (OCC). The test is purely quantitative. Moving one layer deeper, it has a competitive advantage if at any point in time it can create a return on invested capital (ROIC) greater than that of its competitors. The two concepts are related, but not identical. Additionally, the test of value creation and/or competitive advantage is not explanatory - it doesn't explain why a company is able to uniquely genrate a ROIC above the OCC. And because VCs  invest while companies and the markets they serve have not yet reached any semblance of steady state, these quantitative tests of value creation and competitive advantage can be very misleading. Thus, it's also important to understand what factors are responsible for creating competitive advantage as described above.

Before we do this though, I want to quickly note one important factor. Questions of competitive advantage only become relevant to investors after questions about product-market fit are answered. Part of why venture capitalists, particularly early-stage VCs, focus on product-market fit more so than antyhing else is that when startups first launch, not only have they not created a competitive advantage, they haven't even proved that they can create value for customers by bringing to market a product or service that people want to buy. Ultimately, the amount of value that a company can create for shareholders is a subset of the value they create for consumers. Only after the company has built something individuals want, thus creating value, can the value created be split amongst the consumer, company, and other participants in the value chain. When investors think about competitive advantage they are thinking about the latter question - value capture - not about value creation, which should be the first and foremost question for startups to answer.

Competitive advantage can expresses itself in three parts: benefit, barrier, and time. At first, we will only a consider competitive advantage at a single point in time. We will return to discuss time in a bit. 

Benefit (to the firm in question, _not_ to the customer) describes how a company earns the excess cash flows necessary to produce a high ROIC for shareholders. Thinking about the quantitative levers a business has to achieve excess cash flow simplifies the analysis a lot. Certis paribus, a firm can generate the excess cash flows associated with competitive advantage in 4 main ways:
1. It can charge a higher price without seeing an erosion of market share.
2. It can achieve a lower cost structure - using less fixed costs, lowering its customer acquisition costs, and/or improving the gross margin of its products, thus making its products cheaper without sacrificing quality attributes. 
3. It can maintain a higher long-term market share without commensurate reductions in price.
4. It can reinvest in new projects at a larger rate without sacrificing ROIC. This lever for cash flow  augmentation doesn't get talked about as much as the other three levers, but it allows for differential increases in cash flow by finding opportunities for high-ROIC investments that others cannot. 

Each of these four factors can be gleaned by thinking about ways a company can produce more cash flow than its competitors.

However, the governing characteristic of competition is arbitrage. Whatever allows a company to generate one of those 4 barriers will be copied very quickly by competitors drawn to the augmented cash flows. Thus the second component to compettive advantage - barriers, are important too.



Why does all this matter? After all this discussion seems very disconnected from then details of running a business. And indeed, you probably won't find such academic ruminations in your favorite management textbook. Organizational excellence is a key ingredient to the success of new and existing businesses that I haven't discussed even one time. But the reason a discussion of competitive advantage matters is that it paints a picture of any company's eventual goal - being a durable businesses that throws off cash like crazy. The next question - and the one that becomes really important - how and under what circumstances can a new company get there?  

## Framework 2: Andy Grove and Strategic Dynamics

Porter's Forces, and all the work that has stemmed from it, provides a great way of analyzing a business at a particular time. In economic parlance it's a great model of competitive _statics_. Unforuntately, it's not well suited to analyze change. And as venture practitioners, change is what we're interested in. Questions like: **How is competitive advantage gained by new entrants and lost by incumbents?**, **What conditions make gaining and losing competitive advantage possible?**  are the ones we're interested in, because they hold the key to making abnormal returns. To answer these questions, we turn to one of Silicon Valley's most important operators - Andy Grove. It turns out, in addition to largely inventing the management style of the Valley, using it to build one of the defining companies in technology history, and writing about it, Andy Grove was also a teacher! He and Robert Burgelman (author of _Strategy is Destiny_) co-taught a class at the Stanford GSB in which they attempted to provide a framework to answer those very questions. They also wrote about in a book called _Strategic Dynamics_ which I recommend for anyone interested in a cool look at a manager and strategists outlook on technology themes in the 1980s and 1990s. Because of that I call this framework the Strategic Dynamics framework.

Grove defines strategy as a company's method for creating profitable growth in its environment. Using that definition, Grove defines the entire set of variables a company needs to conisder as a set of three elements: **P**, **E** and **e**. **P** is the company of interest while **E** represents it's environment. **P** then can be seen as a vector consisting of the variables an individual company can internally control, while **E** is a vector consisting of market and non-market forces that shape the environment the company operates in. Which ones? The exact same forces Porter (and others) identified above. **E** consists of the traditional five market forces forces - suppliers, customers, substitutes, direct competitors, and new entrants - as well as complementors, distribution channels, and two non-market forces, technology and governemental regulation. So far, it seems that this framework is just the same framework we defined above with some added structure. Not so. Grove also defined a third element of the set: **e**, which represents _other industries_ or _emerging environmental elements_ that have the potentially to affect **E** and thus **P** at some time in the future. e can represent an emerging technology, emerging substitutes, emerging complements, emerging customers (e.g. a new market), etc. That is, it consists of a vector with the _same_ representative elements as **E**, but in a different context, either from another industry or something new altogether. Together, **(E,e)** represent the entire environment a company must consider when strategizing.

Grove realized that normally, the interactions between any element in **(E,e)** are in steady-state, which can be desribed like this.

Firstly, the current relationship between P and each element in E can be either one of indifference, subordination, or interdependence or dominance, depending P's control over and dependence on E (e.g. high control, low dependence leads to a sitaution of strategic dominance). See Figure 1 for a full typology. At any point in time, the sum of these relationships determines whether a firm has competitive advantage, and thus will experience returns on invested capital above that of its peers.Note that this statement is not explanatory, merely observational in nature - this tells me nothing about why P is strategically subordinate or dominant, just that it is. If, at this point in time, we're interested in knowing why the firm has a competitive advantage, we need to return to Framework #1. Let's examine an example.  Ttake a firm like Google. Google's moat is extremely multifaceted. But two important sources of its competitive advantage derive from the direct networking effects it owns due to data acquisition for product improvement, as well as the indirect networking effect it enjoys due to its presence as a platform for information exchange between content producers, advertisers, and users. These are sources of competitive advnatage as discussed in FW #1, and they allow it to be strategically dominant to nearly every single element in it's E, be it suppliers, customers, substitutes, and comlpements. Thus, we can see that environmental relationships that range between strategically dominant and strategically interdependent are markers of competitive advantage.

Secondly, while change in these relationships - and thus the competitive situation - is ubiquitous, the type of change and the competitive effects of that change can be radically different. Some change is **limited and stable**. In this situation of limited change, both actors in the (E,e) as well as P engage in what are known as rule abiding actions, which Grove defines as, "actions that are consistent with the prevalent power relationships among the industry players and with the industry recipe for success". These rules, which can be **normative** (based on law, culture, ethics, administrative principles), **technological** (based on the available technology), **economic** (representing the existing balance of economic power), or **cognitive** (involving widely shared knowledge about success factors), are the embodiment of statics. When limited change occurs, the relationships between elements in (E,e) and P don't change (i.e. subordinate firms remain subordinate, dominant firms remain dominant) and thus competitive advantage, when it exists, isn't born or lost. Some change can occur of course, but it doesn't meaningfully change the distribution of potential industry earnings (PIE), nor can it create or destroy entire industries. As an example, think of recent interactions between Boeing and Airbus, two aerospace manufacturerers. Airbus made a strategic error in comitting resources to the A380 product, which was based on a flawed belief that the customer base desired larger, higher capacity planes (largely because Boeing's faux committments to upgrading the 747-800). The A380 flopped on launch and Airbus will never recoup the investment it made in developing the product, but the aerospace industry has not materially changed in structure. The manufacturing segment is still characterized by a duopoly. Manufacturers hold more power than airline operators, etc. The basis of Boeing and Airbus' competitive advantage hasn't changed. Boeing just gained a bit at the expense of Airbus.  

More radical types of change - the type of change that we're interested in as venture capitalists - occurs when 10X change in elements of P or E,e (remember, the elements inlcude technology, government regulation, customers, suppliers, etc.) allows for rule-breaking actions to be taken, either by actors in the environment (P-independent change) or by  P-itself (P-controlled change), or by both (Runaway change - more common than you might think!). These actions then materially affect the distribution of potential industry earnings (PIE), either by creating an industry, altering one, or destroying one. Lastly, Grove also noticed that such change - change that allows for rule-breaking actions to be engaged in - rarely derives from E or P, but rather from autonomous initiatives taken by players (usually without the knowledge of the parent company) in e. Most opportunities presented by e are small and/or not viable - but at times e can grow rapidly to complement, substitute, or create E. Additionally and just as important, the small size of e offers the opportunity for players (either P, or others in E) to explore opportunities for rule-breaking action _outside_ the purview of the existing steady state environment. 

This framework provides a powerful set of guidelines for the ways change can occur, industries can be created, altered by new entrants, or even destroyed, as follows:

1. P is the company of interest. E = (Customers, Direct Competitors, Suppliers, Substitutes, Complementors, New Entrants, Technology, Government Regulation, Channels). e is a carbon copy of E except each entry in e represents the same force in adjacent industries or emerging segments. 
2. At any point in time, P either has or does not have a competitive advantage. To test whether a firm does, you must consider two questions. Does the firm have materially higher cash flows than competitors (Benefit)? And are there reasons why only they have acess to that higher cash flow (Barriers)? Benefit is defined by a company's ability (all else equal) to charge higher prices, maintain higher market share, obtain a lower cost structure (higher gross margin, lower acquisition costs, etc.), or invest at a faster rate than it's direct competitors. If a firm can do this, it likely has competitive advantage. Barriers are reasons **why** others cannot achieve those benefits. 
3. This competitive advantage - if it exists - is expressed in the relationships (subordinate, interdependent,cominant, indifferent) between P and each element of (E,e) and in the rules of the interactions (technological, normative, cultural, economics) that elements in E abide by. Linear change is rule abiding and doesn't change relationships in way to materially change PIE or create/destroy industries.
4. However, 10X changes in the elements of (E, e) (Most often, e, e.g. exploring an emerging technology that can create a new product) can allow for rule-breaking actions to be taken, and thus materially alter the relationships between P and (E,e). Thus, competitive advantages can be gained and lost due to 10x changes in elements of e. 
5. The importance of e as a shield from existing competitive situation of E has to be noted. Here's why. What allows for e to engage in rule-breaking actions is a 10X change in some environmental element, often a technological shift. But what prevents actors in E (especially incumbent companies) from attempting to enter _e_ is uncertainty stemming from its **size** or **viability**. Let's consider a thought experiment. A new entrant, _N_ approaches an existing environment E, in which competitive advantage is held by a set of firms P<sub>1</sub>, and P<sub>2</sub>. _N_ has used a 10X change in technology (an member of _e<sub>1</sub>_)to create a product, _P_, with better performance and cheaper cost structure. It decides to market this product to the existing customer set in E first. Because _N_ is launching the product with obviously defined benefits to the customer segement in E - solving the same problem as P's products - the signal to P<sub>1</sub> and P<sub>2</sub> that this change very well could negatively affect their slice of the PIE is strong.  Unless there is a strong reason why the existing incumbents **cannot replicate and market the product** (a tight appropiability regime exists), they will do so because the signal of danger is so clear.  However,  by exploring say, an emerging market segment, _e<sub>2</sub>_, whose needs can only be met by the new product, P<sub>1</sub> and P<sub>2</sub> will be hesistant to enter the technology seriously perhaps because they will doubt that the size of _e<sub>2</sub>_ will be large or grow fast enough to justify investment - markets that don't exist can't be analyzed! Or, if not, they could doubt the technical viability of the product emerging from _e<sub>1</sub>_, which could prevent them from entry due to technological uncertainty. In both cases, _e_ is valuable to new entrants beacuse of its _uncertainty_. 10X changes can occur without uncertainty, and may change PIE and industry structure, but not necessarily in a way that allows for new entrants to be successful.
6. The other thing I wanted to note is that often, an _e_ (or likely, a set of them) can emerge without reference to another _E_. That is, whole new industries can truly be born. Consider the market for...

Note: The use of '10x' is a convention I have taken from Grove and highly depends on the context of the change - some changes that can allow for rule-breaking actions to be taken may not necessarily be a quantitative 10x in magnitude. E.g. it's impossible to say whether a technological change like the Closed Body in automotive manufacturing increased the value of the product by 10x to customers, but it did enough to allow new entrants like Chrysler and GM, which did not have competitive advantage, to gain it!

Grove has a great name for points at which, due to 10X changes in market and non-market forces, often derving from e, put tremendous strain upon a companies relationship between the environment. They're called a **strategic inflection point**. The takeaway for venture capitalists, to me, is pretty clear. You should be investing in companies that present 
 

## Framework 3: Silicon Valley's Favorite Professor Returns - Disruptive Innovation (Heavily Modifed)

Ah, good old disruption. Ever since the theory was published it's been a lightning rod for criticism and praise. Supporters of the theory point out that in a world where most frameworks for innovation are based in anecdotes, Christensen's is backed by real research. VCs like Marc Andreesen also point out that only Christensen's theories explain several key facets of technological innovation that they routinely see in practice: Christensen's theory both explains why well-managed firms, not a result of idiocy or stupidity, but of their pursuit of profits, can miss emerging product-market opportunities that they had the capability to capitalize on, as well as why new innovations are so often dismissed as 'toys', yet due to rapidly increasing performance trajectories, can soon take on huge importance as the flagship products of impressive firms. Detractors point out that while the theory may be accurate in so far as its defined, it cannot offer a totalizing picture of technology-based new entrants. Many new entrants did not commercialize 'good-enough' product categories appealing to new, unserved markets or existing, low-margin customers via ancillary benefits outside the main performance metric. Uber, Google, SpaceX, even General Electric back in the day, were each successful new entrants that - almost irrespective of one considers the 'incumbent' in question - successfully introduced products that were not less complex, cheaper, good-enough products, but more expensive and immediately orders of magnitude higher performance than the product categories they replaced. Ben Thompson, a noted that Christensen's theory of low-end disruption might not apply nearly as well in consumer markets, as Christensens' prediction of Apple's doom has been proved wrong accross three separate product introductions (iPod, iPhone, iPad) spanning two distinct industries. Additionally, as venture-philosopher Jerry Neumann points out, disruption, despite all its academic backing, is not a prescriptive theory - it doesn't tell entrepreneurs _how_ to build a great business moving forward. 

I've always been vexed by the theory too. 

On the one hand, its supporters have a really good point. New products are often not taken seriously when it's first introduced, only to later become lynchpins of our modern way of life, bringing with them new dominant firms. Leading firms can, if not go bankrupt, certainly 'fade' from relevance, even when well run, and also miss new emerging market opportunities even with the capabilities to enter. And Christensen's theory of new market disruption (as opposed to low-end disruption) makes a really clear point that is seen all the time, which is that new products often are launched in new market niches outside a current customer base, and then, over time, 'suck' the customer base out of the old product-market and into the new one, leading to the collapse of the old product-market. That process of new-category creation followed by hollowing out of the old-category can be seen so often in the history of technology (dating back to like 1830...) that it's almost eerie. In fact, if you remember FW#2, this process of category creation and collapse maps in a 1-to-1 fashion to the idea of a new entrant exploring an initially small e that eventually grows to substitute E. 

But on the other hand, the critiques are damning too. Specifically, Christensen's focus on new companies entering markets with 'good-enough' products that underperform existing products on traditional metrics, but are cheaper and outperform on an ancillary metric, does **not** explain all innovation. It certainly cannot explain biotechnology new entrants, the field in which I work and in which new entrants have a deep history of success (e.g. Genentech, Amgen, many other nameless but successful exits that have improved the standard of care and made money for VCs). But it also can't explain much of the modern tech movement. To quote Neumann, "But neither Square nor Uber were disruptive in The Innovator’s Dilemma sense. Neither was cheaper and less functional than what they were replacing and then remained cheaper as functionality grew. Merchants that adopted Square early on did not do so because it was cheaper than the alternative, they adopted it because they finally had a viable way to accept credit cards; for most of them it was more expensive than their previous way of doing business (cash) and more expensive than what the incumbents would have provided, if the incumbents had provided them anything. The key difference between what Square did and disruption is that Square did not open a new market by bringing the cost down into the reach of an entirely new set of customers, they served a small set of customers that the incumbents simply didn’t care about because it was a small market. This is not disruption, it’s classic market segmentation. Nor did people adopt Uber because it was cheaper. Neither set of customers–the riders or the drivers–saved money from using Uber. Riders use Uber because it’s easier to hail a taxi that way, not comparative cost. Drivers use Uber because it’s more attractive than driving a taxi, not comparative pay. Both of these are an indirect result of taxi regulation. Again, this is not disruption. The new market was available because Uber first ignored, then lobbied to change, regulations that made that market seemingly unavailable to new entrant." Going back even further in technology history, Neumann notes, "Intel, after all, did not enter the microprocessor market by intentionally introducing a cheaper general purpose computer, they entered it by introducing a much more expensive slide rule…the 4004 was developed to power electronic calculators. The market for electronic calculators was small, allowing Intel the room to build expertise in CPUs, but Intel’s entry can’t be described by Christensen’s attack from below process unless you take into account facts not then in evidence: that CPUs would be used to build general purpose computers". Other examples that come to mind include Google Maps. It was better in **every way** than existing solutions from TomTom or NavTek - and cheaper to boot. For an older one, consider the introduction of electric lighting as a substitute for gas lighting in the late 1800s. Electric lighting was immediately recognized for its ability to thoroughly surpass kerosene as a form of home lighting, but was much more expensive at first. 

Additionally, the theory, for all its specifications, is really vague when it comes to identifying and denoting different types of competitors and incumbents, something that Porter's theory does a great job of doing.  Who did Google and its search engine product disrupt? Microsoft, because they missed search and instead won the browser market, which was difficult to monetize? Or newpsapers and libraries, which was the way we 'got the job done' with respect of information search before Google? Or Yahoo, AltaVista and other internet search 'incumbentsl? Are they the incumbents Christensesn refers to? What about the introduction of the iPhone? Was it Nokia and other cellular phone designers who were disrupted? What about PC manufacturers? A host of other companies' whose products - once key parts of independent business lines - were reduced to apps on the iPhone? What about cases of new industry creation, in which a need that couldn't previously be served by any customer, rich or poor, becomes served. (Note also that both examples I point out also suffer from problem 1 - they are disruption from above, not below). 

That being said, I'm not going to dismiss disruption. Rather I'm going to modify it.

Let's handle problem 2 first: incumbents and the definition of markets, two topics which go hand in hand. Geoffrey Moore, the author of _Crossing the Chasm_ defines a market as a set of actual or potential customers for a given set of products or services who have a common set of needs or wants. Defined so narrowly, almost any new product can be considered as entering a 'new market'. I think it's more prudent to focus on the _common sets of needs or wants_. This ironically, is the central point of one of Christensen's later books. Customers don't by products, they buy solutions to their problems, needs, and wants. Some needs and wants are static - and thus there have to be other companies that provide a solution to the problem. Others emerge as truly 'new', e.g. Cisco's market for multiprotocol routers emerged out of the growth of LANs in the mid-80s. Thus, the best way to define new market isn't clear to me. I like Neumann's definition, which I shamefully stole from a Twitter response: "a new market is a set of customers for a set of products where the customer set defines the products as a new category--it's a social process of associating a problem with a distinct competitive set, with non-category companies being substitutes". 
 Using that defintion we can subdivide 'incumbents' into several categories. Remember that techically, due to the inherenty scarcity of dollars in customers pockets and attention with which to pay attention to products, every company competes with every other company, regardless of the similarities of the product-markets they operate in. But to be more useful, we can zoom in a bit. Revisiting Google's introduction of a search engine product, we see that, despite being a late entry to the market for search engines, Google was still not entering a market that one could describe as "well served" by highly dominant incumbents. In this situation, there were some **direct incumbents** who made products that allowed for the search and discovery of content on the Internet, like AltaVista and Yahoo. There were also **'adjacent' incumbents**, companies that didn't produce search engine products of _any_ kind, but operated in different parts of the value chain (e.g. Microsoft in Browsers or AOL in online portals/web-services) or in adjacent markets. These incumbents can be characterized mainly by the _capabilities_ that their presence as dominant companies in their adjacent markets  bestowed upon them. Usually this capability set provides the possibility that these companies could compete with the new entrant, which is why they are relevant. From a competitive standpoint, these incumbents are  also often the 'largest' and most resource rich of all the competitors a startup might face. Google, Facebook, Amazon, and Apple hold this position nowadays. They may not be directly competing in a market _yet_, but they have the capability to enter almost any market where software is even remotely involved. Lastly we have to consider **indirect incumbents** - what newspapers, encyclopeadias, and libraries were to Google. While these incumbents didn't operate in anywhere near the same product or service category (although they can), they did serve similar 'jobs to be done' - the search and retrieval of information. That is, indirect incumbents are the companies that have solutions that solve the problem of customers in the best available way in the status quo. The market may be small due to the limitations of that solution, but the solution is there. Taxi service companies for example fall in this last category with respect to Uber. And as we can see from their blight, it's often these indirect incumbents that bear the competitive displacements of disruption most acutely.
 
Taken together, I think startups should think about whether the markets - defined by the problems,needs and wants of potential customers - they are entering are 'well-served' by considering the quality of the solutions offered by these three types of incumbent. Totally new markets can be born, as consumers can experience new problems to solve and new wants to quell- often created by other products and technologies they use. In this case, there are no indirect incumbents to worry about, but that doesn't mean there aren't adjacent incumbents and direct incumbents (i.e other startups started before you with some market share). This case also presents a great opportunity for new companies, because they're not competing against any existing solutions, which greatly simplifies the 'value creation' aspect of being a startup - they only have to worry about building defensibility against other startups and adjacent incumbents. In other cases - and most cases -startups will offer a totally type of new product category that solves an existing problem, but is doing so in a meaningfully, discontinuous way. I call these entrants, new product category entrants. 

What are the implications for disruption theory? My hypothesis is that disruption theory is really about solutions to problems. Disruption occurs when the creation of a new product category solves a problem or meets a need in a way that causes existing solutions to those problems to be abandoned and the companies providing those solutions are forced to exit the business (although they may not go bankrupt) or see their profits from that business greatly reduced. Therefore, in the cases where a new problem is truly born, the framework of disruption doesn't really make much sense to use. In other cases, the incumbents we're mainly concerned about are indirect incumbents, whether those indirect incumbents market solutions that have similar products or not. For example, when PCs disrupted mainframe and minicomputers,  the engineering background and technical similarities of the two products were related. Uber displaced taxis (note that Uber did not disrupt taxis in the Christensonian sense, but will in the framework I'm building) even though the solutions that they served were pretty different. The Bessemer Process for Steel Manufaturing disrupted both artisinal ways of making steel - similar engineering backgrounds - as well as other materials entirely. Lastly, disruption theory doesn't say much about adjacent competitors (although they can at times also be indirect incumbents) and why they don't enter markets unless they are also indirect incumbents. We will have to correct that issue. 

Now let's handle problem 1: disruption from above. In classical disruption theory - whether of the new market or low-end variety, it just doesn't exist. The reason why disruption must come from below in Christensen's theory is because the cheap and "good enough, but worse" nature of the product is what structurally allows incumbents to ignore the new entrant with the product - they don't see it as worth their precious dollars. Incumbents are relentlessly focused on providing better performance along the traditional dimensions of performance and using that to increase margin and keep up with competitors. Thus, in the case of low-end disruption, they are happy to let you take the low-end of the market with your cheap but 'good enough' solution, thinking that the worse product will remain bad and thus will not leapfrog the existing solution's capabilities. Only after it's too late do the company realize that the new product has pulled all the customers into the new product class with improving performance. In the case of new-market disruption, it's a similar story, but the worse performance allows for _new_ customers,  who wouldn't otherwise (due to complexity and/or cost) use the existing product, to use the new product. The improving performance trajectory then allows for the new product to pull the existing customers out of the existing market. Incumbents avoid entering the new segment because it's historically a segment of the population they haven't targeted because they were unprofitable or impossible to serve. 

Both theories are valid, in so far as there are examples that demonstrate its existence and that the theory has a valid internal logical structure. New market disruption particularly rings as eerie, because it supports the idea of new products creating a new new category and market, before improving in performance so effectively that old consumers, who used the expensive way of 'getting the job done' now abandon the segment, which is left to die. As a consequence of targeting new customers, the TAM for the product category is many times larger than the old market - another thing we frequently see as VCs.  PCs for example, a **great** examplpe of this. But this type of entry not universal. As Benedict Evans demonstrated in his article about disruption from above, a new product can start out expensive and better than existing products, but end up improving performance and decreasing in price so much that the market ends up expanding as well, displacing incumbents along the way. This was also the case with the automobile, railroad, and typewriter.  

To better derive the typology of different types of entry though, we have to get a bit more specific. There are three characteristics of a new product that matter in disruption: performance along the metric valued by the existing customers, new performance characteristics not valued by the existing market, and the cost of the product. This is a great diagram.

Christensen considers cases when ancillary performance can be higher than existing solutions, while traditional performance and cost is lower. But examples exist - as the diagram shows - for products where traditional, ancillary performance is higher, while cost is either higher or lower. How can we explain their ability to displace existing solutions?  

Going back to our considerations of why Christensen considers disruption from below to be necessary, the crucial lesson to takeaway is this: disruption occurs because **well funded adjacent or indirect incumbents have to be unwilling to make the investment necessary to develop the product because their internal organizational structures place insufficient value on that product-market opportunity to divert precious capital to its development**. Thus, we have to be explain why, even in the case where products launch with superior performance, either along the existing performance dimensions or in ancillary ones, adjacent or indirect incumbents fall into this same trap. Or, we have to be able to explain why incumbents fail by other means.

Everything's Better. Higher Ancillary Performance, Higher Traditional Performance, Lower Cost.






https://dspace.mit.edu/bitstream/handle/1721.1/8883/48845761-MIT.pdf?sequence=2

### Better Defining Competitors 

### Utterback and Abernathy's Dominant Design

### Updating the Failure Framework


## Framework 4: Who Profits from Innovation?

## Framework 5: General Purpose Technologies and Lessons from History 


1. Create a new industry from scratch.

2. Take something that was dominated by artisnal skills --> cheap + ubiquitous

3. 

## Putting it all together: Entrepreneurial Strategy

So we've done a quick and dirty review of the mental models that I've found most useful for elucidating the causal dynamics of business success. How can we synthesize all this information in a coherent whole that places the frameworks in the context of startup investing?

I think startup success boils down to two big ideas, each of which is touched upon by some of the frameworks.

1. Successful Entry. 
2. Defensibility. 

All startups have to think about the questions: **Why can I enter this market?** and **What can I do to prevent others - who might be other startups or fast following adjacent and/or indirect incumbents - from entering and arbitraging all the profits out of the market?**. 


### Successful Entry

Disruption - at least my heavily modified version - and Grove's Strategic Dynamics Model are the frameworks that I think are most critical to answering the question. 

Starting with my definitions of the types of incumbents that exist: indirect, direct, and adjacent, startups should first try to answer the question of: "Why can I enter this market?", where markets are defined by problems, needs, and wants. This question can be decomposed into 2 subquestions.

1. Why are existing solutions to the problem _insufficient_?
2. Why can't indirect incumbents - the people who sell solutions to the problem in the status quo -  implement the solution themselves?

The answers to these questions are many. One answer is that the problem, need, or want, is fundamentally new and thus indirect incumbents don't _exist_.

More likely though, the startup will be selling a new product that acts as a substitute to existing solutions. In this case, disruption can be very helpful, because the entire framework was built to explain situations when new products can displace existing solutions. 

Put even more simply, startups should be entering the marketplace because of a strategic inflection point - some 10X change in the existing business environment -  

### Difficult Middle Ground

In between these two questions of defensibility and entry lies a tricky third player that complicates things a bit - the adjacent incumbent. If you remember, I define an adjacent incumbent as a company operating in an adjacent industry or product-market, which has the capabilities and assets (gained through producing 







